OPEN
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology 
625
commentary
L
iving organisms produce a range of 
secondary metabolites with exotic 
chemical structures and diverse 
metabolic origins. Many of these secondary 
metabolites find use as natural products in 
medicine, agriculture and manufacturing. 
Research on natural product biosynthesis 
is undergoing an extensive transformation, 
driven by technological developments 
in genomics, bioinformatics, analytical 
chemistry and synthetic biology. It has 
now become possible to computationally 
identify thousands of biosynthetic gene 
clusters (BGCs) in genome sequences, and 
to systematically explore and prioritize them 
for experimental characterization1,2. A BGC 
can be defined as a physically clustered 
group of two or more genes in a particular 
genome that together encode a biosynthetic 
pathway for the production of a specialized 
metabolite (including its chemical variants). 
It is becoming possible to carry out initial 
experimental characterization of hundreds 
of such natural products, using high-
throughput approaches powered by rapid 
developments in mass spectrometry3–5 
and chemical structure elucidation6. At 
the same time, single-cell sequencing and 
metagenomics are opening up access to new 
and uncharted branches of the tree of life7–9, 
enabling scientists to tap into a previously 
undiscovered wealth of BGCs. Furthermore, 
synthetic biology allows the redesign of 
BGCs for effective heterologous expression 
in preengineered hosts, which will ultimately 
empower the construction of standardized 
high-throughput platforms for natural 
product discovery10,11.
In this changing research environment, 
there is an increasing need to access all 
the experimental and contextual data on 
characterized BGCs for comparative analysis, 
for function prediction and for collecting 
building blocks for the design of novel 
biosynthetic pathways. For this purpose, 
it is paramount that this information be 
available in a standardized and systematic 
format, accessible in the same intuitive way 
as, for example, genome annotations or 
protein structures. Currently, the situation is 
far from ideal, with information on natural 
product biosynthetic pathways scattered 
across hundreds of scientific articles in a 
wide variety of journals; it requires in-depth 
reading of papers to confidently discern 
which of the molecular functions associated 
with a gene cluster or pathway have been 
experimentally verified and which have been 
predicted solely on the basis of biosynthetic 
logic or bioinformatic algorithms. Although 
some valuable existing manually curated 
databases have data models in place to 
store some of this information12–14, all are 
specialized towards certain subcategories 
of BGCs and include just a limited number 
of parameters defined by the interests of 
a subset of the scientific community. To 
enable the future development of databases 
with universal value, a generally applicable 
community standard is required that 
specifies the exact annotation and metadata 
parameters agreed upon by a wide range 
of scientists, as well as the possible types 
of evidence that are associated with each 
variable in publications and/or patents. 
Such a standard will be of great value for 
the consistent storage of data and will thus 
alleviate the tedious process of manually 
gathering information on BGCs. Moreover, 
a comprehensive data standard will allow 
future data infrastructures to enable the 
integration of multiple types of data, which 
will generate new insights that would 
otherwise not be attainable.
The Genomic Standards Consortium 
(GSC)15 (Box 1) previously developed 
the Minimum Information about any 
Sequence (MIxS) framework16. This 
extensible ‘minimum information’ 
standardization framework includes the 
Minimum Information about a Genome 
Sequence (MIGS)17 and the Minimum 
Information about a MARKer gene 
Sequence (MIMARKS)16 standards. MIxS is 
a flexible framework that can be expanded 
upon to serve a wide variety of purposes. 
The GSC facilitates the community effort 
of maintaining and extending MIxS, 
and stimulates compliance among the 
community.
Here, we introduce the “Minimal 
Information about a Biosynthetic Gene 
cluster” (MIBiG) specification as a 
coherent extension of the GSC’s MIxS 
standards framework. MIBiG provides 
a comprehensive and standardized 
specification of BGC annotations and gene 
cluster–associated metadata that will allow 
their systematic deposition in databases. 
Through a community annotation of BGCs 
that have been experimentally characterized 
and described in the literature during 
previous decades, we have constructed an 
MIBiG-compliant seed dataset. Moreover, 
a large part of the research community has 
committed to continue submitting data 
on newly characterized gene clusters in 
the MIBiG format in the future. Together, 
the MIBiG standard and the resulting 
MIBiG-compliant data sets will allow data 
infrastructures to be developed that will 
facilitate key future developments in natural 
product research.
Design of the MIBiG standard
The MIBiG standard covers general 
parameters that are applicable to each and 
every gene cluster as well as compound type–
specific parameters that apply only to specific 
classes of pathways (Fig. 1). Notably, the 
standard has been designed to be suitable for 
Minimum Information about a 
Biosynthetic Gene cluster
A wide variety of enzymatic pathways that produce specialized metabolites in bacteria, fungi and plants 
are known to be encoded in biosynthetic gene clusters. Information about these clusters, pathways and 
metabolites is currently dispersed throughout the literature, making it difficult to exploit. To facilitate 
consistent and systematic deposition and retrieval of data on biosynthetic gene clusters, we propose the 
Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) data standard.
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the 
end of the paper.
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
626 
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology
commentary
biosynthetic pathways from any taxonomic 
origin, including those from bacteria, 
archaea, fungi and plants. 
The general parameters cover 
important data items that are universally 
applicable. First, they include identifiers 
of the publications associated with the 
characterization of the gene cluster, so that 
the full description of the experimental 
results that support the entire entry can be 
accessed easily.
The second key group of general 
parameters describes the associated 
genomic locus (or loci) and its accession 
numbers and coordinates, as deposited 
in or submitted to one of the databases 
of the International Nucleotide Sequence 
Database Collaboration (INSDC): the 
DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ), the 
European Nucleotide Archive (EBI-ENA) 
or GenBank, all of which share unified 
accession numbers. The INSDC accession 
numbers are also used to link each MIBiG 
entry (which is given a separate MIBiG 
accession number) and its annotations to 
the corresponding nucleotide sequence(s) 
computationally; hence, a GenBank/
ENA/DDBJ submission of the underlying 
nucleotide sequence is always required to 
file a MIBiG submission. 
The third group of general parameters 
describes the chemical compounds 
produced from the encoded pathway, 
including their structures, molecular 
masses, biological activities and molecular 
targets. Additionally, these parameters allow 
documentation of miscellaneous chemical 
moieties that are connected to the core 
scaffold of the molecule (but synthesized 
independently) and the genes associated 
with their biosynthesis; this will facilitate 
the design of tools for the straightforward 
comparison of such ‘sub-clusters’, which 
are frequently present in different variants 
across multiple parent BGCs. 
Finally, there is a group of general 
parameters describing experimental data on 
genes and operons in a gene cluster, including 
gene knockout phenotypes, experimentally 
verified gene functions and operons verified 
by techniques such as RNA-seq. 
Beside the general parameters, the 
MIBiG standard contains dedicated 
class-specific checklists for gene clusters 
encoding pathways to produce polyketides, 
nonribosomal peptides (NRPs), ribosomally 
synthesized and post-translationally 
modified peptides (RiPPs), terpenes, 
saccharides and alkaloids. These include 
items such as acyltransferase domain 
substrate specificities and starter units 
for polyketide BGCs, release/cyclization 
types and adenylation domain substrate 
specificities for NRP BGCs, precursor 
peptides and peptide modifications for RiPP 
BGCs, and glycosyltransferase specificities 
for saccharide BGCs. Where applicable, 
the standard was made compliant with 
earlier community agreements, such as 
the recently published classification of 
RiPPs18. Hybrid BGCs that cover multiple 
Figure 1 | Schematic overview of the MIBiG standard. The MIBiG standard is composed of general 
and compound class–specific parameters. Wherever relevant, evidence coding is used to indicate 
the experimental support for items in the checklist. Fields annotated with an asterisk are absolutely 
mandatory; fields with two asterisks are conditionally mandatory.
Biosynthetic class(es)*
Tailoring enzymes/reactions*
Compound type–specific parameters
Linear/cyclic*
Linear/cyclic*
Release/cyclization type*
Complete/partial cluster*
Release/cyclization type*
Module skipping/iteration**
Module skipping/iteration**
Terpene synthases/cyclases
Starter unit*
Cyclases/aromatases*
The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC, http://gensc.org/) was founded 
in 2005 as an open-membership working body with the purpose of promoting 
the standardization of genome descriptions as well as the exchange and 
integration of genomic data. 
The GSC initiates and coordinates the design of and compliance with several 
minimum information standards (also known as checklists). An overarching 
framework has been designed to connect and standardize these checklists 
themselves: the Minimum Information about any (x) Sequence (MIxS)16. MIxS 
consists of three layers.
First, the MIxS standard includes a number of shared descriptors that 
are relevant to all types of nucleotide sequences, such as collection date, 
environmental origin, geographical coordinates of the location of origin of the 
sample and sequencing method.
Second, for a wide range of different environmental origins, so-called 
‘environmental packages’ are available that constitute checklists of 
measurements and observations that are specific to each environment: for 
example, for host-associated microbial DNA samples, the taxonomy of the 
host, the habitat of the host and several phenotypic characteristics of the host 
can be collected. In this manner, rich contextual information on the context of 
each microbial sample is stored.
Third, several checklists are available for specific sequence types, each 
having their own checklist-specific descriptors. Previous checklists include 
the Minimum Information about a Genome Sequence (MIGS)17, Minimum 
Information about a Metagenome Sequence (MIMS)17 and Minimum 
Information about a MARKer gene Sequence (MIMARKS)16.
In spring 2013, the MIBiG project proposal was accepted by the board of the 
GSC to form a new checklist within the MIxS framework. Besides a number 
of general descriptors, it also includes pathway type–specific packages that 
function analogously, for different classes of biosynthetic pathways, to the way 
the MIxS environmental packages do for different environmental origins. 
Box 1 | The Genomic Standards Consortium and its MIxS framework
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology 
627
commentary
biochemical classes can be described by 
simply entering information on each of the 
constituent compound types: the checklists 
have been designed in such a way that this 
does not lead to conflicts. Importantly, the 
modularity of the checklist system allows 
for the straightforward addition of further 
class-specific checklists when new types of 
molecules are discovered in the future.
The combination of general and 
compound-specific MIBiG parameters, 
together with the MIxS checklist, provides 
a complete description of the chemical, 
genomic and environmental dimensions 
that characterize a biosynthetic pathway 
(Fig. 2). A minimal set of key parameters 
is mandatory, while other parameters are 
optional. For many parameters, a specific 
ontology has been designed in order to 
standardize the inputs and to make it easier 
to categorize and search the resulting data. 
Whenever possible, parameters are linked 
to a system of evidence attribution that 
specifies the kinds of experiments performed 
to arrive at the conclusions indicated by 
the chosen parameter values. Hence, each 
annotation entered during submission 
is assigned a specific evidence code: for 
example, when annotating the substrate 
specificity of a nonribosomal peptide 
synthetase (NRPS) adenylation domain, the 
submitter can choose between ‘activity assay’, 
‘structure-based inference’ and ‘sequence-
based prediction’ as evidence categories to 
support a given specificity.
During the design of the standard, great 
care was taken to make it compatible with 
unusual biosynthetic pathways, such as 
branched or module-skipping polyketide 
synthase (PKS) and NRPS assembly lines. 
Also, to ensure that the standard is compliant 
with the current state of the art in the various 
subfields of natural product research, we 
conducted an online community survey at 
an early stage of standard development (see 
Supplementary Data Set 1). Feedback was 
provided by 61 principal investigators from 
16 different countries (most of whom also 
coauthored this paper), including at least 
ten leading experts for each major class of 
biosynthetic pathways covered.
Addressing key research needs 
Adoption of the MIBiG standard will 
allow the straightforward collation of all 
annotations and experimental data on each 
BGC, which would otherwise be dispersed 
across multiple scientific articles and 
resources. Moreover, there are at least three 
additional key ways in which MIBiG will 
facilitate new scientific and technological 
developments: it will enable researchers to 
systematically connect genes to chemistry 
(and vice versa), to better understand 
secondary metabolite biosynthesis and the 
compounds produced in their ecological and 
environmental context, and to effectively use 
synthetic biology to engineer newly designed 
BGC configurations underpinned by an 
evidence-based parts registry (Fig. 3).
First, the comprehensive dataset 
generated through MIBiG-compliant 
submissions will enable researchers to 
systematically connect genes and chemistry. 
Not only will it allow individual researchers 
to predict enzyme functions by comparing 
enzyme-coding genes in newly identified 
BGCs to a thoroughly documented dataset, 
it will also facilitate general advances in 
chemistry predictions. Substrate specificities 
of PKS acyltransferase domains and 
NRPS adenylation domains, as well as 
their evidence codes, will be registered 
automatically for all gene clusters. This 
will enable automated updating of the 
training sets for key chemistry prediction 
algorithms19–21, which can then be curated 
by the degree of evidence available, 
increasing the accuracy of predictions of 
core peptide and polyketide scaffolds. Also, 
because groups of genes associated with the 
biosynthesis of specific chemical moieties 
(such as sugars and nonproteinogenic 
amino acids) will be registered consistently, 
a continuously growing dataset of such sub-
clusters will be available to use as a basis for 
chemical structure predictions. 
In addition, MIBiG has the potential 
to greatly enhance the understanding of 
secondary metabolite biosynthesis in its 
ecological and environmental context: the 
connection of MIBiG to the MIxS standard 
should stimulate researchers to supply 
MIxS data on the genome and metagenome 
sequences that contain the BGCs. This 
will generate opportunities for a range 
of analyses, such as the biogeographical 
mapping of secondary metabolite 
biosynthesis22, thereby identifying locations 
and ecosystems harboring rich biosynthetic 
diversity. But even if the contextual data 
associated with the genome sequences 
cannot always be made MIxS compliant 
(perhaps because the origin of a strain can no 
longer be traced), the MIBiG standard itself 
provides a comprehensive reference dataset 
for annotating large-scale MIxS-compliant 
metagenomic data from projects such as the 
Earth Microbiome Project23, Tara Oceans24 
and Ocean Sampling Day25. This will enable 
scientists to obtain a better understanding of 
the distribution of BGCs in the environment. 
Altogether, the standard will play a 
significant role in guiding sampling efforts 
for future natural product discovery.
Finally, the data resulting from MIBiG-
compliant submissions will provide an 
evidence-based parts registry for the 
engineering of biosynthetic pathways. 
Synthetic biologists need a toolbox 
containing genetic parts that have been 
experimentally characterized. The MIBiG 
standard, through its systematic annotation 
of gene function by evidence coding, 
knockout mutant phenotypes and substrate 
specificities, will streamline the identification 
of all available candidate genes and proteins 
available to perform a desired function, 
together with the pathway context in which 
they natively occur. In this manner, it will 
provide a comprehensive catalog of parts that 
can be used for the modification of existing 
biosynthetic pathways or the de novo design 
of new pathways.
Community annotation effort
To accelerate the usefulness of new MIBiG-
compliant data submissions, we initiated this 
project by annotating a significant portion 
of the experimental data on the hundreds 
of BGCs that have been characterized in 
recent decades. The resulting data will 
allow immediate contextualization of new 
submissions (see below) and comparative 
Figure 2 | An example MIBiG entry, describing the relatively simple hybrid NRPS-PKS biosynthetic gene 
cluster for isoflavipucine/dihydroisoflavipucine from Aspergillus terreus. Fields without information have 
been omitted, and some JSON field abbreviations have been modified for clarity. The full entry is available 
from http://mibig.secondarymetabolites.org/repository/BGC0001122/BGC0001122.json.
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
628 
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology
commentary
analysis of any newly characterized BGCs 
with a rich source of MIBiG-compliant 
data. Moreover, this annotation effort 
offered an ideal opportunity to evaluate 
the MIBiG standard in practice on a 
diverse range of BGCs. Hence, we carefully 
mined the literature to obtain a set of 
1,170 experimentally characterized gene 
clusters: 303 PKS, 189 NRPS, 147 hybrid 
NRPS-PKS, 169 RiPP, 78 terpene, 123 
saccharide, 21 alkaloid and 140 other BGCs. 
Compared to the 288 BGCs currently 
deposited in ClusterMine36012 and the 
103 BGCs deposited in DoBISCUIT14, this 
presents a significant advance in terms of 
comprehensiveness. We then annotated each 
of these 1,170 BGCs with a minimal number 
of parameters (genomic locus, publications, 
chemical structure and biosynthetic class 
and subclass). Subsequently, in a community 
initiative involving 81 academic research 
groups and several companies worldwide, 
we performed a fully MIBiG-compliant 
reannotation of 405 of these BGCs according 
to the information available in earlier 
publications and laboratory archives. (All 
participants of this annotation effort are 
either listed as coauthors of this article 
or mentioned in the Acknowledgments, 
depending on the size of their contribution.) 
An initial visualization of the full data 
set arising from this reannotation is 
publicly available online at http://mibig.
secondarymetabolites.org. Altogether, these 
submitted entries will function as a very 
useful seed dataset for the development of 
databases on secondary metabolism. Future 
data curation efforts will strive to achieve 
a fully MIBiG-compliant annotation of the 
remaining 765 BGCs that are currently 
annotated with a more restricted set of 
parameters.
Planned implementation
To allow straightforward and user-
friendly access, the MIBiG standard will 
be implemented by multiple databases 
and web services for genome data and 
secondary metabolite research. For example, 
the MIBiG-curated dataset has already 
been integrated into the antiSMASH 
tool in the form of a new module26 that 
compares any identified BGCs with the 
full MIBiG-compliant dataset of known 
BGCs. Moreover, a full-fledged database 
is currently under development that will 
be tightly integrated with antiSMASH 
and will build on the previously published 
ClusterMine360 framework12. Additionally, 
MIBiG-compliant data will be integrated into 
the recently released Integrated Microbial 
Genomes Atlas of Biosynthetic Clusters 
(IMG-ABC) database from the Joint 
Genome Institute (https://img.jgi.doe.gov/
ABC/)27. Regular exchange of data will take 
place between the MIBiG repository and the 
IMG-ABC, antiSMASH and ClusterMine 
databases. Additional cross-links with 
the chemical databases ChemSpider28, 
chEMBL29 and chEBI30 are being developed 
so that researchers can easily find the full 
MIBiG annotation of the BGC responsible 
for the biosynthesis of given molecules. 
Finally, all community-curated data are 
freely available and downloadable in JSON 
format for integration into other software 
tools or databases, without any need to 
request permission, as long as the source is 
acknowledged.
For submission of new MIBiG-compliant 
data by scientists in the field, we prepared an 
interactive online submission form (available 
from http://mibig.secondarymetabolites.
org), which was extensively tested through 
the community annotation effort. Data can 
also be submitted through the BioSynML 
plug-in26 (http://www.biosynml.de) that 
was recently built for use in the Geneious 
software. In this way, MIBiG-compliant 
data can easily be integrated with the in-
house BGC content management systems 
of individual laboratories or companies. 
Finally, it will be possible to submit updates 
to existing MIBiG entries based on peer-
reviewed articles through dedicated web 
forms.
Future perspectives
The MIBiG coordinating team within the 
GSC is committed to ensuring the continued 
support and curation of the MIBiG standard, 
in cooperation with its partners. Compliance 
with the standard and interoperability with 
other standards and databases will also be 
guaranteed within the GSC. In order to stay 
relevant and viable, MIBiG is projected to 
be a ‘living’ standard: updates will be made 
as needed to remain technologically and 
scientifically current. 
Coordination with relevant journals will 
be sought to make MIBiG submission of 
BGCs (evidenced by MIBiG accession codes) 
a standard item to check during manuscript 
review. To stimulate submission of MIBiG 
data during the process of publishing new 
biosynthetic gene clusters, unique MIBiG 
accession numbers are provided for each 
BCG that can be used during article review 
(including for data embargoed until after 
publication). The research community 
represented by this paper commits itself 
to submitting MIBiG-compliant data sets 
as well as updates to existing entries when 
publishing new experimental results on 
Figure 3 | The MIBiG data standard and submission system will lead to a continuously growing dataset 
(stored in the online MIBiG repository) that will be loaded into several databases and web services. The 
lower part of the figure shows the threefold potential of MIBiG for the study of BGCs, which will make it 
possible to (1) systematically connect genes and chemistry by identifying which genes are responsible for 
the biosynthesis of which chemical moieties; (2) understand the natural genetic diversity of BGCs within 
their environmental and ecological context, by combining MIBiG- and MIxS-derived metadata sets; and 
(3) develop an evidence-based parts registry for engineering biosynthetic pathways and gene clusters 
through synthetic biology.
Submitting
scientists
MIBiG
repository
Data standard
1. Connecting genes
to chemistry
2. Understanding BGC
environmental diversity
3. Computer-guided
gene cluster engineering
Multiple online databases and services
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology 
629
commentary
Marnix H Medema1,115,*, Renzo Kottmann1, Pelin Yilmaz1, Matthew Cummings2, John B Biggins3, Kai Blin4, 
Irene de Bruijn5, Yit Heng Chooi6–8, Jan Claesen9,10, R Cameron Coates11, Pablo Cruz-Morales12,  
Srikanth Duddela13, Stephanie Düsterhus14, Daniel J Edwards15, David P Fewer16, Neha Garg17,  
Christoph Geiger14, Juan Pablo Gomez-Escribano18, Anja Greule19, Michalis Hadjithomas11,  
Anthony S Haines20, Eric J N Helfrich21, Matthew L Hillwig22, Keishi Ishida23, Adam C Jones24,  
Carla S Jones25, Katrin Jungmann13, Carsten Kegler26, Hyun Uk Kim4,27, Peter Kötter14, Daniel Krug13,  
Joleen Masschelein28,29, Alexey V Melnik17, Simone M Mantovani30, Emily A Monroe31, Marcus Moore32, 
Nathan Moss30, Hans-Wilhelm Nützmann33, Guohui Pan34, Amrita Pati11, Daniel Petras35, F Jerry Reen36, 
Federico Rosconi37, Zhe Rui38,39, Zhenhua Tian40, Nicholas J Tobias26, Yuta Tsunematsu23,41,  
Philipp Wiemann42, Elizabeth Wyckoff43,44, Xiaohui Yan34, Grace Yim45, Fengan Yu46–49, Yunchang Xie50, 
Bertrand Aigle51, Alexander K Apel52,53, Carl J Balibar54, Emily P Balskus55, Francisco Barona-Gómez12,  
Andreas Bechthold19, Helge B Bode26,56, Rainer Borriss57, Sean F Brady3, Axel A Brakhage23,  
Patrick Caffrey58, Yi-Qiang Cheng59, Jon Clardy60, Russell J Cox61,62, René De Mot63, Stefano Donadio64,  
Mohamed S Donia65, Wilfred A van der Donk66,67, Pieter C Dorrestein17,30,68, Sean Doyle69,  
Arnold J M Driessen70, Monika Ehling-Schulz71, Karl-Dieter Entian14, Michael A Fischbach9,10,  
Lena Gerwick30, William H Gerwick17,30, Harald Gross52,53, Bertolt Gust52,53, Christian Hertweck23,72,  
Monica Höfte73, Susan E Jensen74, Jianhua Ju50, Leonard Katz75, Leonard Kaysser52,53, Jonathan L Klassen76,  
Nancy P Keller42,77, Jan Kormanec78, Oscar P Kuipers79, Tomohisa Kuzuyama80, Nikos C Kyrpides11,81,  
Hyung-Jin Kwon82, Sylvie Lautru83, Rob Lavigne28, Chia Y Lee84, Bai Linquan85,86, Xinyu Liu22, Wen Liu40,  
Andriy Luzhetskyy13, Taifo Mahmud87, Yvonne Mast88, Carmen Méndez89,90, Mikko Metsä-Ketelä91,  
Jason Micklefield92, Douglas A Mitchell66, Bradley S Moore17,30, Leonilde M Moreira93, Rolf Müller13,  
Brett A Neilan94, Markus Nett23, Jens Nielsen4,95, Fergal O’Gara36,96, Hideaki Oikawa97, Anne Osbourn33, 
Marcia S Osburne98, Bohdan Ostash99, Shelley M Payne43,44, Jean-Luc Pernodet83, Miroslav Petricek100,  
Jörn Piel21, Olivier Ploux101, Jos M Raaijmakers5, José A Salas89, Esther K Schmitt102, Barry Scott103,  
BGCs. We encourage the larger community 
to join in this endeavor. 
◼
References
1. Cimermancic, P. et al. Cell 158, 412–421 (2014).
2. Doroghazi, J.R. et al. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 963–968 (2014).
3. Kersten, R.D. et al. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7, 794–802 (2011).
4. Kersten, R.D. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, E4407–E4416 
(2013).
5. Gubbens, J. et al. Chem. Biol. 21, 707–718 (2014).
6. Inokuma, Y. et al. Nature 495, 461–466 (2013).
7. Charlop-Powers, Z., Milshteyn, A. & Brady, S.F. Curr. Opin. 
Microbiol. 19, 70–75 (2014).
8. Wilson, M.C. & Piel, J. Chem. Biol. 20, 636–647 (2013).
9. Wilson, M.C. et al. Nature 506, 58–62 (2014).
10. Shao, Z. et al. ACS Synth. Biol. 2, 662–669 (2013).
11. Yamanaka, K. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111, 1957–1962 
(2014).
12. Conway, K.R. & Boddy, C.N. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D402–D407 
(2013).
13. Anand, S. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, W487–W496 (2010).
14. Ichikawa, N. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D408–D414 (2013).
15. Field, D. et al. PLoS Biol. 9, e1001088 (2011).
16. Yilmaz, P. et al. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 415–420 (2011).
17. Field, D. et al. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 541–547 (2008).
18. Arnison, P.G. et al. Nat. Prod. Rep. 30, 108–160 (2013).
19. Röttig, M. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, W362–W367 (2011).
20. Khayatt, B.I., Overmars, L., Siezen, R.J. & Francke, C. PLoS One 8, 
e62136 (2013).
21. Baranašić, D. et al. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 41, 461–467 
(2014).
22. Charlop-Powers, Z. et al. Elife 4, e05048 (2015).
23. Gilbert, J.A., Jansson, J.K. & Knight, R. BMC Biol. 12, 69 (2014).
24. Bork, P. et al. Science 348, 873 (2015).
25. Kopf, A. et al. GigaScience 4, 27 (2015).
26. Weber, T. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, W237–W243 (2015).
27. Hadjithomas, M. et al. mBio 6, e00932-15 (2015).
28. Pence, H.E. & Williams, A. J. Chem. Educ. 87, 1123–1124 (2010).
29. Bento, A.P. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, D1083–D1090 (2014).
30. Hastings, J. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D456–D463 (2013). 
Acknowledgments
M.H.M. was supported by a Rubicon fellowship of the 
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO; 
Rubicon 825.13.001). The work of R.K. was supported by 
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme 
(Joint Call OCEAN.2011–2: Marine microbial diversity—
new insights into marine ecosystems functioning and its 
biotechnological potential) under the grant agreement no. 
287589 (Micro B3). M.C. was supported by a Biotechnology 
and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) 
studentship (BB/J014478/1). The GSC is supported by 
funding from the Natural Environment Research Council 
(UK), the National Institute for Energy Ethics and Society 
(NIEeS; UK), the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, 
the National Science Foundation (NSF; US) and the US 
Department of Energy. The Manchester Synthetic Biology 
Research Centre, SYNBIOCHEM, is supported by BBSRC/
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC) grant BB/M017702/1. We thank P. d’Agostino, P.R. 
August, R. Chau, C.D. Deane, S. Diethelm, L. Fernandez-
Martinez, A. El Gamal, C. Garcia De Gonzalo, T.H. 
Grossman, C.-J. Huang, S. Kodani, A.L. Leandrini, I.A. 
MacNeil, M. Metelev, E.M. Molly, C. Olano, M. Ortega, 
L. Ray, K. Reynolds, A. Ross, I.N. Silva, R. Teufel, G. 
Thibodeaux, J. Tietz and D. Widdick for their contributions 
in the community annotation. We thank  
R. Baltz, M. Bibb, C. Boddy, C. Corre, E. Dittmann,  
H. Gramajo, N. Ichikawa, H. Ikeda, P. Jensen, C. Khosla,  
R. Li, M. Marahiel, D. Mohanty, C. Moore, W. Nierman,  
D.-C. Oh, E. Schmidt, Y. Shen, D. Stevens, B. Tudzynski 
and S. Van Lanen for useful comments on an early draft 
version of the community standard. We are grateful to three 
anonymous referees for their constructive suggestions.
Author contributions
M.H.M., R.B., E.T. and F.O.G. initiated and coordinated 
the MIBiG standardization project. M.H.M. designed the 
first draft of the standard. M.H.M., R.K., P.Y. and F.O.G. 
coordinated integration within the MIxS framework. 
M.H.M. and R.K. constructed the submission system. 
M.H.M. and M.C. curated submitted community 
annotation entries. M.H.M., R.K., P.Y., M.C., R.B., E.T. 
and F.O.G. wrote the first draft of the paper. All authors 
contributed to the design of the standard, contributed to 
the community annotation of MIBiG entries and provided 
feedback on an early draft of the paper.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available in the online 
version of the paper.
This work is licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 
Unported License. The images or otherthird party material 
in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons 
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the 
material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder 
to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/.
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
630 
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology
commentary
Ryan F Seipke104, Ben Shen34,105, David H Sherman46–49, Kaarina Sivonen16, Michael J Smanski106,107,  
Margherita Sosio64, Evi Stegmann53,88, Roderich D Süssmuth35, Kapil Tahlan32, Christopher M Thomas20,  
Yi Tang6,7, Andrew W Truman18, Muriel Viaud108, Jonathan D Walton109, Christopher T Walsh110,  
Tilmann Weber4, Gilles P van Wezel111, Barrie Wilkinson18, Joanne M Willey112, Wolfgang Wohlleben53,88, 
Gerard D Wright45, Nadine Ziemert53,88, Changsheng Zhang50, Sergey B Zotchev113, Rainer Breitling2,  
Eriko Takano2 & Frank Oliver Glöckner1,114
1Microbial Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany. 2Manchester Centre for Synthetic Biology of 
Fine and Speciality Chemicals (SYNBIOCHEM), Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 3Laboratory of 
Genetically Encoded Small Molecules, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA. 4Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Hørsholm, Denmark. 5Netherlands Institute of Ecology (NIOO-KNAW), Department of Microbial Ecology, 
Wageningen, the Netherlands. 6Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. 7Department 
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. 8School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 9Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 
USA. 10California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. 11Department of Energy (DOE) Joint 
Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, California, USA. 12Evolution of Metabolic Diversity Laboratory, Unidad de Genómica Avanzada (Langebio), Centro de Investigación y de 
Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (Cinvestav-IPN), Irapuato, Guanajuato, México. 13Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research, Helmholtz 
Centre for Infection Research and Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. 14Institute for Molecular Biosciences, Goethe 
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. 15Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, California State University, Chico, California, USA. 16Microbiology and 
Biotechnology Division, Department of Food and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 17Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. 18Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK. 
19Department of Pharmaceutical Biology and Biotechnology, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 20School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK. 21Institute of Microbiology, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. 22Department of Chemistry, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. 23Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology (HKI), Jena, Germany. 24Gordon and Betty Moore 
Foundation, Palo Alto, California, USA. 25Sustainable Studies Program, Roosevelt University Chicago, Illinois, USA. 26Merck Stiftungsprofessur für Molekulare 
Biotechnologie, Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Fachbereich Biowissenschaften, Frankfurt, Germany. 27BioInformatics Research Center, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. 28Laboratory of Gene Technology, KU Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium. 29Laboratory of Food Microbiology, KU Leuven, Heverlee, 
Belgium. 30Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. 
31Department of Biology, William Paterson University, Wayne, New Jersey, USA. 32Department of Biology, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, 
Newfoundland, Canada. 33Department of Metabolic Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK. 34Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research 
Institute, Jupiter, Florida, USA. 35Institut für Chemie, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 36BIOMERIT Research Centre, School of Microbiology, University 
College Cork–National University of Ireland, Cork, Ireland. 37Departamento de Bioquímica y Genómica Microbianas, IBCE, Montevideo, Uruguay. 38Energy Biosciences 
Institute, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. 39Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA. 40State Key Laboratory of Bioorganic and Natural Products Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China. 41Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan. 42Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University 
of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 43Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA. 44Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA. 45Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, The M.G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious 
Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 46Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 47Department of 
Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 48Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 49Department 
of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 50Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, Guangdong Key 
Laboratory of Marine Materia Medica, RNAM Center for Marine Microbiology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 
China. 51Dynamique des Génomes et Adaptation Microbienne, Université de Lorraine and Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), Unité Mixte de 
Recherche (UMR) 1128, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France. 52Pharmaceutical Institute, Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 
53German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 54Infectious Disease Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Kenilworth, New 
Jersey, USA. 55Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 56Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences 
(BMLS), Goethe Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany. 57Fachbereich Phytomedizin, Albrecht Thaer Institut, Humboldt Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 58UCD 
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 59UNT System College of Pharmacy, University of North Texas Health Science 
Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA. 60Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 61Institut für 
Organische Chemie, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Hannover, Germany. 62School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. 63Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, 
Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, University of Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium. 64Naicons Srl, Milano, Italy. 65Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, 
Princeton, New Jersey, USA. 66Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA. 67Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, USA. 68Collaborative Mass Spectrometry Innovation Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. 69Department of Biology, Maynooth 
University, Maynooth, County Kildare, Ireland. 70Department of Molecular Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute and Zernike 
Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. 71Functional Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Pathobiology, 
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 72Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany. 73Department of Crop Protection, Faculty of Bioscience 
Engineering, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 74Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 75Synthetic Biology Engineering 
Research Center (SynBERC), University of California Emeryville, Emeryville, California, USA. 76Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, Connecticut, USA. 77Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 78Institute of Molecular Biology, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. 79Department of Molecular Genetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands. 80Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 81Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, King 
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 82Division of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Myongji University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea. 83Institute of 
Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique (CEA), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université Paris Sud, Orsay, 
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
NATURE CHEMICAL BIOLOGY | VOL 11 | SEPTEMBER 2015 | www.nature.com/naturechemicalbiology 
631
commentary
France. 84Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA. 85State Key Laboratory of Microbial 
Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 86School of Life Sciences & Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 87Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. 88Microbiology/Biotechnology, Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, 
Faculty of Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 89Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain. 90Instituto Universitario de 
Oncología del Principado de Asturias (I.U.O.P.A), Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain. 91Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. 92School of 
Chemistry, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 93Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. 
94School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. 95Department of Chemical and Biological 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. 96Curtin University, School of Biomedical Sciences, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 97Division of 
Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. 98Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 99Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, Ivan Franko National University of Lviv, Lviv, Ukraine. 100Institute of Microbiology, Academy of 
Sciences of the Czech Republic (ASCR), Prague, Czech Republic. 101Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Energies de Demain (LIED), UMR 8236 CNRS, Université Paris 
Diderot, Paris, France. 102Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Campus, Basel, Switzerland. 103Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand. 104Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK. 105Molecular Therapeutics and Natural Products Library Initiative, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida, USA. 106Department of Biochemistry, 
Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of Minnesota–Twin Cities, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA. 107BioTechnology Institute, University of Minnesota–Twin Cities, 
Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA. 108Unité BIOlogie et GEstion des Risques en agriculture (BIOGER), Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), Grignon, France. 
109Department of Energy Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center and Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, 
USA. 110Chemistry, Engineering & Medicine for Human Health (ChEM-H) Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 111Molecular Biotechnology, Institute 
of Biology, Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands. 112Hofstra North Shore–Long Island Jewish School of Medicine, Hempstead, New York, USA. 113Department of 
Biotechnology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. 114Jacobs University Bremen gGmbH, Bremen, Germany. 115Present address: 
Bioinformatics Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands.  
*e-mail: marnix.medema@wur.nl
npg
© 2015 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
