Methods


Materials

Three human dermal fibroblast cell lines were purchased from the Coriell Cell Repositories (Camden, NJ): a wild type female (catalog no. GM05659), a female TSD patient (GM00515), and a male TSD patient (GM00221). See Table 1 


Generation and characterization of induced pluripotent stem cells

Fibroblasts were cultured in DMEM medium with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1X penicillin-streptomycin, and 1X sodium pyruvate. Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines were generated from three fibroblast lines using the non-integrating CytoTune-iPS 2.0 Sendai Reprogramming Kit (Table 1). Two iPSC clones were generated from each Tay-Sachs disease cell line. The iPSCs were cultured on Matrigel pre-coated tissue culture plates using Essential 8 medium and passaged using an EDTA-based protocol as previously described [16]. All iPSC lines were cultured beyond passage 10, to ensure the clearance of Sendai viruses and the stability of the iPSC cell lines.

Short tandem repeat (STR) DNA analysis was performed by Johns Hopkins University's Genetic Resources Core Facility on each set of TSD patient fibroblast cells and NSC lines to confirm their identity as derivatives of patient fibroblast lines GM00515 and GM00221. G-banded karyotyping analysis of iPSCs was conducted using standard cytogenetic protocol by WiCell Research Institute (Madison, WI). The harvested iPSCs were incubated with ethidium bromide and colcemid in a hypotonic solution before being fixed. Twenty randomly chosen cells in metaphase from each iPSC clone were stained with Leishman's stain and analyzed by G-banding. The immunofluorescence staining and flow cytometry were also used to characterize iPSCs generated. Immunocytochemistry assay was performed on fixed iPSCs using the pluripotent cell markers of Sox2, Oct4, Nanog, Tra-1-60, and SSEA4. Cells were imaged using an INCell 2200 imaging system (GE Healthcare) using 20X objective lens and Cy5, FITC, and DAPI filter sets. For the FACS analysis, iPSCs were also harvested and fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde and washed, followed by a 10 min incubation with 0.2% Tween-20 to permeabilize cell membrane. The cells were then stained with anti-Tra-1-60-FITC and anti-Nanog-AlexaFluor 488. FACS was performed on a BD Accuri C6 Flow Cytometry System.


Neural stem cell differentiation and characterization

Tay-Sachs disease iPSCs were differentiated into neural stem cells (NSCs) using the PSC neural Induction Medium kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacture's protocol. Once iPSCs reached confluence of 70 to 80%, cells were dislodged from plates using 0.5 mM EDTA buffer and seeded onto Matrigel coated 6-well plates at 3 × 10 5 cells/well in E8 medium with 10 μM of Rock Inhibitor Y-27632. Cells were incubated overnight at 37°C to attach onto the plate. The culture media was then changed to PSC Neural Induction Medium containing 1X Neural Induction Supplement in Neurobasal Medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Media was changed daily for 7 days. On the 7th day of neural induction, the NSCs were dissociated from the plate using Accutase enzyme cell detachment medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and seeded into Matrigel pre-coated T75 flasks for further expansion in the Neural Expansion Medium containing 1X Neural Induction Supplement in equal volume of Neurobasal Medium and Advanced DMEM/F-12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

A Human Neural Stem Cell ICC kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to characterize NSCs generated from TSD patients and WT control iPSCs. The anti-PAX6 antibody was replaced with Oct4 to verify that the NSCs were no longer iPSCs. The manufacture's protocol was followed for the immunofluorescence staining. Cells were then imaged in the INCell 2200 imaging system (GE Healthcare) using a 20X objective lens with Cy5, FITC, and DAPI filter sets. Additionally, Tay-Sachs disease NSCs were sent to the Johns Hopkins University Genetic Resources Core Facility for STR DNA profiling with the FAF's PowerPlex 16D (Promega) Standard Service Plus Profile Search.


Neuron differentiation and characterization

Tay-Sachs patient NSCs were further differentiated into neurons using STEMdiff™ Neuron Differentiation Kit and STEMdiff™ Neuron Maturation Kit (StemCell Technologies) according to the manufacture's protocol. After 7 days of differentiation of Tay-Sachs NSCs to neuronal precursors in 6-well plate using STEMdiff™ Neuron Differentiation medium, cells were dislodged and seeded into Poly-L-ornithine (PLO)/laminin coated black, clear bottom, tissue-culture treated 96-well plate in STEM-diff™ Neuron Maturation medium for another 7-14 days before downstream application. Immunofluorescence staining of several neuronal markers MAP2 (Cell signaling), beta-III-tubulin (Cell signaling), Neurofilament-L (Cell signaling) as well as Nestin (neural stem cell protein marker, BD Bioscience) were performed to characterize the neuronal cells derived from TSD patient and WT control NSCs.


Nile red assay

Nile Red dye stains the accumulated lipids and lipid droplets in cells. It has been reported that the yellow-gold fluorescence detects cytoplasmic lipid droplets better than red fluorescence [11,12,17]. In this experiment, the Nile Red dye staining was used to evaluate the accumulation of lipids in TSD patient NSCs, as well as neuronal cells. Briefly, cells were seeded onto 96-well plates using the NSC maintenance media from the StemPro NSC SFM kit with 5 μM Rock Inhibitor. Plates with TSD NSCs were incubated overnight at 37°C and Rock Inhibitor was removed the following day. The assay media was replaced and 10% FBS (Hyclone) was added to the medium followed by overnight incubation at 37°C to load the lipids into the NSC cells. Assay media was then replaced to remove the FBS, and plates were incubated again overnight at 37°C for the Nile Red assay to be performed the following day. Nile Red powder was reconstituted in DMSO to 1 mM and stored in the dark at − 20°C until used. In the Nile Red staining assay, the stock solution was diluted to 1 μM in warmed assay media and incubated with cells for 10 mins in the dark at 37°C. The cells were then washed twice using Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at room temperature. Hoechst was also added to the fixing step using a 1:5000 dilution. After washing twice with DPBS, 200 μl/well DPBS was added before analyzing in the INCell 2200 imaging system using a 20X objective lens with TR/TR, FITC/ YFP, and DAPI/DAPI filter sets.

LysoTracker Red dye staining TSD NSCs were seeded and treated with FBS in the same way as described above. For the LysoTracker dye staining, the NSCs were treated with 50 nM LysoTracker Red DND-99 dye (L-7528, Thermo Fisher Scietific) in assay media at 37°C for 1 h followed by plate washing twice with DPBS. The plates were fixed and stained with Hoechst simultaneously in 4% paraformaldehyde solution with Hoechst dye at a 1:5000 dilution for 30 min at room temperature. Plates were washed twice using DPBS and stored with 100 μl/well DPBS at 4°C until imaging. Images were acquired using the INCell 2200 imaging system using a 20X objective lens with Texas Red and DAPI filter sets.


Filipin staining

Filipin dye was used to stain unesterified cholesterol in cells [18]. Cells were seeded at 2000 cells/well in 100 μl of media in black, clear bottom, tissue culture-treated 96-well plates and cultured for 24 h. The test compounds were dissolved in media and then added at 100 μl /well; the cells were returned to incubation for 4 days. The cells were washed twice with DPBS and fixed with 100 μl/well of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution at room temperature for 30 min. After washing twice with DPBS, the cells were stained with 50 ng/mL Filipin solution (freshly dissolved in DMSO at 10 mg/ mL and then diluted in DPBS) at room temperature for 1 h. The plates were stored in 100 μl/well DPBS at 4°C after washing two times with DPBS before imaging analysis. On the day of the imaging, cell nuclei were stained with 100 μl/well of 4 μM ethidium homodimer (EthD-1) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DPBS at room temperature for 30 min. The plates were imaged using the INCell 2200 imaging system with a 20X or 40X objective lens. A DAPI filter set (excitation = 350 ± 50 nm, and emission = 455 ± 50 nm) and Cy3 filter set (excitation = 543 ± 22 nm, and emission = 604 ± 64 nm) were used to visualize Filipin and EthD-1 staining, respectively.


GM2 ganglioside immunofluorescence staining

For immunofluorescence staining of GM2, same FBS treatment protocol was used as for the Nile Red staining experiment prior to the staining. Briefly, 10% FBS was added to the assay medium followed by overnight incubation to load the lipids into the cells. Assay media was then replaced to remove the FBS, and plates were incubated again overnight at 37°C for the GM2 immunofluorescence staining to be performed the following day. Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, rinsed with PBS, and permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 for 15 min at 4°C. Cells were incubated with normal goat serum 10% blocking buffer (Life Technologies) and incubated with mouse anti-GM2 antibody (Amsbio, clone MK1-16) overnight at 4°C. After washing with PBS, a corresponding secondary antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor 594 was added. Cells were then stained with Hoechst 33342 for 20 min and imaged using an INCell Analyzer 2200 imaging system (GE Healthcare) with 20X objective lens and Texas Red and DAPI filter sets.


LC-MS/MS analysis of GM2 in TSD NSCs

We further utilized the LC-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to determine the GM2 content in TSD patient cells following the protocol established previously [19]. Briefly, TSD patients and WT control neural stem cell pellets were collected and suspended in 50 μL of water. The ganglioside GM2 was extracted from cell suspension with protein precipitation with methanol in the presence of internal standard (d3-GM2 (18:0)). The ganglioside GM2 was separated by column-switching high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and monitored by multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) detection on an Applied Biosystems Sciex 6500QTRAP+ tandem mass spectrometer (MS/MS) equipped with an electrospray ion source. A quality control (QC) sample was prepared from pooled study samples and injected every 3 study samples to monitor the LC-MS/MS assay performance. All the ganglioside GM2 species in QC injections demonstrate CV < 15%. The protein precipitate from extraction was dissolved in a mixture of 2% CHAPS (100 μL) and 1% SDS (750 μL), and the protein was measured with BCA assay. The relative quantification data were provided as area ratios of GM2 species to internal standard, which were normalized to the protein.

Recombinant β-hexosaminidases production in Pichia pastoris GS115

Recombinant Hex A was produced in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris GS115 as previously described [20]. Briefly, cDNA of α-(GenBank AAH84537) and β-(GenBank AAH17378) subunits of human β-hexosaminidases were codon-optimized for P. pastoris and inserted into a pPICK9k vector. Constructs pPIC9k-alpha or pPIC9k-beta were co-transformed into P. pastoris GS115. Clones were evaluated at a shake flask scale, and that with highest activity was used for production of recombinant human Hex A (rhHexA). Cultures were prepared in a modified FM22 saline media and protein production conditions were performed as previously described [20,21].

Recombinant protein was purified from culture media thanks to the presence of the α-factor secretion signal, and purified by ion exchange chromatography as previously described [20]. β-Hexosaminidase activity was assayed by using 4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-acetyl-glucosaminide (MUG, Sigma-Aldrich) or 4-methylumbelliferylβ-D-acetyl-glucosaminide sulfate (MUGS, Calbiochem) substrates [20,22]. One unit (U) was defined as the amount of enzyme hydrolyzing 1 nmol of substrate per hour. Specific hexosaminidase activity was expressed as U/mg of total protein determined by a Lowry assay.

Enzyme replacement therapy TSD NSCs were seeded onto 96-well plates pre-coated with Matrigel using the NSC maintenance media formulated from the StemPro NSC SFM kit containing 5 μM Rock Inhibitor. Plates were incubated at 37°C overnight and the medium was changed the following day to remove Rock Inhibitor; 100 nM of Hex A recombinant enzyme was incubated with TSD NSCs for 4 h at 37°C in NSC maintenance media. The media was changed to remove excess recombinant enzymes not taken up by the cells and other components in the buffer of enzyme stock that are not suitable for neural stem cell culture. Because the neural stem cell culture medium does not containing serum and regular lipid components, 10% FBS was added to the medium to facilitate lysosomal storage of lipids. Therefore, we added the enzyme first and wash the cells 4 h later to replace with the medium containing 10% FBS for cell culture overnight. NSCs were cultured in NSC maintenance medium with or without 10% FBS for 24 h at 37°C. The Nile Red dye staining was performed on the following day.


Treatments with HPβCD and δ-tocopherol

On Day 0, TSD NSCs and wild type NSCs were seeded into 96-well plates pre-coated with Matrigel in 100 μl/well of NSC maintenance media from the StemPro NSC SFM kit along with 5 μM Rock Inhibitor. The plates were incubated overnight at 37°C. The media was changed the next day (Day 1) to remove Rock Inhibitor. The cells were treated with HPβCD and δ-tocopherol at 37°C for 24 h. On Day 2, the medium was replaced with NSC maintenance medium containing 10% FBS and HPβCD or δ-tocopherol followed by incubation at 37°C for another 24 h. HPβCD was dissolved in water while δ-tocopherol was dissolved in DMSO to a 100 mM stock. The Nile Red dye staining was performed on Day 3 of the experiment.


ATP content assay for cell viability

An ATP content assay kit (ATPLite, PerkinElmer) was used to measure cell viability to monitor compound cytotoxicity. Cells were seeded at 2500 cells/well in 100 μl medium in white, solid 96-well plates and incubated for 24 h. Cells were cultured and treated as described above. After 3 days of incubation, 100 μl/well of ATP content reagent mixture (prepared according to the manufacturer's instruction) was added to the assay plates followed by incubation at room temperature for 2-5 min. The luminescence signal was determined in the luminescence mode of the ViewLux Plate reader (PerkinElmer).


Data analysis and statistics

Image analysis of Nile Red staining, LysoTracker Red staining, and Filipin staining was performed using INCell Analyzer software (GE Healthcare, version 3.7.2). The Multi-Target Analysis protocol was used for quantification of all three assays. Concentration-response curves were analyzed and IC 50 values calculated using the Prism software (GraphPad, Inc., San Diego). Results in the figures were expressed as mean of replicates ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Unless otherwise stated, an unpaired t-test was used to test for significance, with * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001.