Methods


General information

The study was a retrospective study and was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Peking university third hospital (No: IRB00006761-2011097). A total of 6736 patients underwent arthroscopic meniscus treatment in our institute between January 15th, 2000 and December 31st, 2008. Those patients with discoid meniscus injuries, posterior cruciate ligament tears or collateral ligament tears were excluded thus 6034 patients with 7241 torn menisci were included in this study. The mean patient age was 33.6 ± 14.9 years and there were 4785 males and 2458 females with 3568 medial and 3673 lateral menisci.

There were 4037 patients diagnosed with ACL rupture and underwent ACL reconstruction at the time of meniscus surgery. The duration of complaint was recorded from the primary injury or the symptom onset of the patients with not clear trauma history. For detailed statistical analysis, the duration of complaint were divided into 0-28 days, 29-56 days, 57 day-1 year, 1-2 year and >2 years. In addition, the patients were also divided into 2 groups based on age ≤ 40 years and >40 years.

All patients were given spinal/epidural anesthesia with bupivacaine. All the surgeries were performed with arthroscopy (Smith-Nephew, Boston, MA, USA) according to a unified and standardized protocol. The joint was thoroughly examined by anteromedial and anterolateral portal using the 30 degree scope in sequential manner. The meniscal tear was confirmed by probing with the same principle of operation indication and technique referenced to the O'Connor's classification [16]. The tear types of both medial and lateral meniscus was recorded as longitudinal, horizontal, oblique, radial, and complex. The surgeons removed all ruptured and offending meniscal tissue and left a stable and smooth rim of meniscus. When the degenerative changes and ruptures were present within the entire meniscus and the rupture reached as far as the synovial junction, total meniscectomy was performed. Excision of the pathological tissue was carried out with punch and mechanical shaver. In most of the cases partial meniscectomy and repair were kept as the first choice of treatment, preferable to subtotal or total meniscectomy. The meniscectomy was recorded as partial if any part of the meniscus was removed, leaving a minimum of two-thirds of the meniscal surface intact. More than one-third of the meniscal surface resection was recorded as subtotal [17,18], most of which underwent posterior horn and mid-third resection with an intact rim and root attachments. All the data including the parameters of the patients and the management of all the meniscus tears were obtained from the medical records.


Data analysis and statistics

All the data were analyzed using SPSS software (version 24.0; IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York). Two data sets were built from the source data set. Medial meniscus injured set involved patients with the diagnosis of medial meniscus tears while the lateral meniscus injured set involved patients with the diagnosis of lateral meniscus tears. For each set, the total or subtotal meniscectomy were treated as outcome events, while the partial meniscectomy or meniscus repair were considered as not event. Then the age was translated into binary variable of ≤40 years or >40 years; while the time to operation was translated into categorical variable. For the univariate analysis, all categorical variable such as age over 40, time slot to operation, gender, side, ACL injured were described with proportion and compared with Chisquare test.

Since the tear category was complicated, and interaction might exist between multiple variables. In order to make the results easier to interpret, the decision tree approach was applied to investigate the association between these factors and total/subtotal meniscectomy. The decision tree was set up by SPSS 24 and established by CHAID method. The minimum number of father and child nodes was 100 and 50, respectively, and the maximum tree depth is 3. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.