Experimental

Single crystals of pure and Mn-doped FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 were grown by self-flux method in identical conditions. As the starting materials we used high-purity elements, 99.99 % Fe (chips), 99.999 % Se (chips), 99.999 % Te, and 99.99% Mn powder. To reduce the amount of oxide impurities, which have a significant influence on the superconducting properties [21], we additionally purified Se and Te by zone melting. Handling of the samples was performed in an argon box with residual oxygen and water content less than 1 ppm. Single crystals were grown in double quartz ampoules sealed under vacuum of 10 -4 mbar. Initial treatment was performed at 650 o C for 10 h followed by heating to 700 o C for 24 h. Further heating was performed up to 1100 o C with 72 h soaking at this temperature. After this the ampoule was cooled with a rate of 1 o C/min down to 400 o C for final annealing during 100 h followed by quenching in ice water. The composition of the samples was checked by Energy dispersive x-ray analysis (EDX). The EDX data are reported elsewhere [21]. The phase content of the samples was also analyzed by x-ray powder diffraction (Cu K α radiation, λ = 1.540560 Å) on crushed single crystals using a STADI-P powder diffractometer (STOE & CIE) with a position sensitive detector.

Magnetic measurements were performed in a temperature range 2 -400 K and in magnetic fields up to 50 kOe using a SQUID magnetometer MPMS 5 (Quantum Design). The heat capacity was measured by relaxation method using a Quantum Design physical properties measurement system (PPMS) in a temperature range 1.8-300 K and magnetic fields up to 90 kOe. Resistivity studies were performed on rectangular samples by four-point method using the resistivity-measurement option of the PPMS with electrical contacts made of silver paint.

For comparison, we also show the data for the best prepared undoped sample (labeled as F216 step 1 in [21]).


Experimental results and discussion

The x-ray diffraction pattern for the Mn-doped sample together with the refined spectrum using the FULLPROF SUITE [22] is shown in Fig. 1. The x-ray data were refined within tetragonal symmetry P4/nmm [23] for the main FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 phase and within hexagonal symmetry P63/mmc for the Fe 7 Se 8 impurity phase. No other impurity phases were revealed by xray diffraction. The positions of Se and Te at the 2c sites were refined with different z coordinates. The occupation of Te and Se was refined constraining the sum to unity in correspondence with the EDX analysis. A similar constraint was used for the occupation of Fe and Mn ions in the main phase. For the Fe ions two different sites (2a and 2c) [24] were allowed.

The occupation factor for Mn was fixed at a nominal level of 2%. The results of the refinement for pure and doped samples are given in Table 1. Within the accuracy of the refinement we could not resolve the exact position of Mn. However, an enhanced value of the lattice constant c compared to the undoped samples suggests that the Mn ions occupy the 2c sites. If the larger Mn ions occupy the 2a positions an increase of the a(b) parameter will be expected, while the experimental data exhibit an opposite trend. Therefore we concluded that the Mn ions preferably occupy the 2c sites. The refined occupation factors for Se and Te are close to their nominal concentration. The refinement reveals a small amount of Fe ions (5%) present at the 2c sites in accord with observations in pure samples [21]. The amount of the hexagonal impurity phase of 4.7% found in the doped samples was higher than in the pure samples (1.4%). Rather astonishingly, the width of the reflections for the doped sample was narrower than for the pure sample (see inset in Fig. 1).     [21] have shown that iron oxide (magnetite, Fe 3 O 4 ) is the main magnetic impurity present in samples handled in air or prepared from non-purified elements. The susceptibility of the samples containing oxide impurities is significantly higher than that of the oxygen-free samples. The pure sample has the minimal content of the magnetic oxide impurity [21]. Therefore, even a smaller value of the magnetic susceptibility of the Mn-doped sample may indicate a further reduction of magnetic impurities. We also must note that the doped sample contains a nearly three times higher amount of the impurity phase of Fe 7 Se 8 than the pure sample (Table 1) Table 2.  In Fig. 4b the temperature dependences of the resistivity taken at different magnetic fields in the transition range are presented for the Mn-doped sample. The magnetic field was applied parallel to the c axis. The measurements were performed on warming after cooling in zero field.

The resistivity curves exhibit a gradual shift to lower temperatures with increasing magnetic field, similar to report on pure samples [21]. The temperature dependences of the upper critical field H c2 (T) determined using the criterion of 50 % drop of the normal-state resistivity R n is presented in the inset of Fig. 4b. The values of the upper critical field H c2 (0) for T=0 K were estimated using the expression H c2 (0)=-0.69T c (dH c2 (T)/dT)| Tc defined by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) model [28]. The calculated results are presented in Table 2. The estimated value of H c2 (0) ~ 580 kOe is higher for the Mn-doped samples than for the pure sample (490 kOe) and can be probably attributed to enhanced impurity scattering from the Mn ions.   It is shown by open squares in the inset of Fig. 4. We found a significant difference between the H c2 (T) determined from the resistivity and from the specific heat, the later being much closer to H c2 (T) derived from the resistivity curves for the field parallel to the ab-plane [21]. The estimations using the WHH formula [28] gave a value of H c2 (0) ~1650 kOe which is by a factor of 2.8 larger than that obtained from the resistivity data. A similar large difference in H c2 (0) determined from the resistivity and specific heat was reported recently for Ba(K)Fe 2 As 2 [29] and FeSe 1-x Te x (with x=0.52) [30] and was ascribed to an anisotropic vortex dynamics.

In the lower inset in Fig. 5 the temperature dependences of the specific heat for the doped sample are shown as C/T vs. T 2 at temperatures below 4.5 K, measured in zero field and in a field of 90 kOe. By a fit to the experimental data in the range below 4.5 K using the expression C/T= γ+βT 2 we determined the values of the residual Sommerfeld coefficient γ r , related to electronic contribution, and the prefactor β characterizing lattice contribution to the specific heat. The respective data are given in Table 2. For the Mn-doped sample a value of γ r ~1.9 mJ/mol K 2 was obtained which is two times larger than that of the pure sample (~1 mJ/mol K 2 [21]). These extremely low values of γ r are to the best of our knowledge the smallest reported so far for FeSe 1-

x Te x and, thus, confirm the high quality of our samples. The dependences of the electronic specific heat in the representation C e /T vs. T are shown in Fig. 6 for a temperature range around the superconducting transition. The electronic specific heat was calculated by subtraction of the lattice contribution from the total specific heat. For the calculation of the phonon contribution a combined Einstein-Debye model was used. The justification of this procedure is presented in Ref. 21. The temperature dependence of the calculated lattice specific heat for the doped sample is shown by a dashed line in Fig. 5.

The temperature behavior of the electronic specific heat in the superconducting state was analyzed within the BCS derived α-model [31,32] with a temperature dependent superconducting gap ∆ similar to the analysis of the specific heat in related (Ba:K)Fe 2 As 2 pnictides [33,34]. The fit results for the electronic specific heat are shown in Fig. 6 by solid lines.

For the ratio of the residual Sommerfeld coefficient γ r to that of the normal state γ n for the Mn-doped sample we obtained a value ~0.07 corresponding to a volume fraction of the superconducting phase of 93%. This is slightly lower than ~96% obtained for the pure sample.

Despite the lower volume fraction of the superconducting phase, the doped sample manifests a significantly higher magnitude of the jump in the specific heat at the superconducting transition.

Certainly this fact has to be attributed to the substitution effect. It may result, for example, from the increased density of states at the Fermi level, as can be concluded from the higher value of the normal Sommerfeld coefficient ( Table 2). Note that the amount of the non-superconducting phase in both samples roughly correlates with the amount of Fe 7 Se 8 . However, this impurity phase, as was already noted above, does not suppress the superconductivity of the FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 .

Therefore in samples prepared without Fe 7 Se 8 impurity one would expect a lower residual Sommerfeld coefficient.

We found that the single-band BCS fit reasonably describes the superconducting specific heat, except the range below 5 K which can be probably related to effects of residual impurities.

The value of the superconducting gap at 0 K is determined as ∆ 0 = 31 K for Mn-doped sample and is higher than ∆ 0 = 26 K obtained for the pure sample [21]. This value is in good agreement with the value of 29 K obtained by Kato et al. [35] from the tunneling spectroscopy and with the low-energy gap observed by Homes et al. [36] in  
