Methods


Malawi Malaria Context

In comparison to other countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Malawi was slower to realize adequate donor support before 2008 [3] which inevitably resulted in a much slower scale up and lower levels of intervention coverage [34,35]. In 2001 the Malawian Government adopted a policy on insecticide treated nets (ITN) to ensure 60% coverage by 2005. The second Malaria Strategic Plan (MSP) [35], launched in June 2005, sought to scale up interventions to ensure 80% coverage of ITNs in high risk groups and access to appropriate treatment by all those at risk of malaria by 2010. In the most recent MSP launched in 2011 these targets have been revised to achieve universal coverage of the four main malaria control interventions: long-lasting insecticide treated bed nets (LLIN), indoor residual spraying (IRS), intermittent presumptive treatment for pregnant women, and prompt treatment with effect artemisinin-based combination therapy for uncomplicated malaria by 2015 [35].

In 2000 less than 4% of Malawian children were protected by an ITN [36]. The dominant ITN delivery approach before 2007 was a combined full cost recovery retail sector promotion along with subsidized cost ITN distribution through antenatal clinics and through the community [37]. The first integrated free mass distribution of ITNs was in 2007. In July 2008 the Ministry of Health, using funds from the Global Fund (GF), launched a largescale distribution campaign of free ITN to, newborns, children under the age of five years and pregnant women. Various household survey data have been collected in Malawi since 2000 aimed at defining the proportion of children below the age of five sleeping under an ITN during the night before the survey.

Initially IRS activities were limited to a single pilot district, Nkhotakota in 2007 covering 27,000 houses in the northern section and were subsequently repeated in 2008 and 2009. In 2010 the President's Malaria Initiative (PMI) expanded IRS activities to the whole district this time including neighbouring Salima District. This has now been scaled-up covering approximately 500,000 households in five additional highly endemic districts in December 2010: Karonga, Nkhata Bay, Mangochi, Chikwawa, and Nsanje Districts [38].

Between 2000 and 2007 sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) was the only drug available in most government clinics [37] even though the efficacy of SP declined rapidly over this period. Officially, first line treatment policy was changed in November 2007 to the more efficacious artemether-lumefathrine (AL) but the new policy was not effectively implemented until early 2008. Additionally, in order to improve access to treatment, community based-case management of malaria was introduced in 2009 in hard to reach areas of Malawi with care provided by health assistants based in village health clinics. In spite of this in 2010 access to effective treatment remained low [34] with less than 30% of febrile children under five treated with AL in 2010 [34].

Thus within the context of financing, intervention delivery and coverage, between 2000 and 2006, there was a definite lack of significant progress toward achieving internationally agreed and nationally adopted coverage targets of malaria interventions. However, starting in 2007 there was an increase in external funding from the Global Fund (GF) and PMI, implementation of AL for treatment and a revised ITN policy to rapidly scale up ITN coverage including the use of mass campaigns.


Selection of Hospital Sites

Malawi is divided into three regions: Central, Northern and Southern with a total of 28 districts. Within this there are 4 central hospitals, 22 designated district general hospitals and 46 rural hospitals managed by either the government or mission sectors. District hospitals provide secondary level health care services and serve to support peripheral clinical services by providing in-patient care and other specialized services. Despite recent efforts at improvement, traditionally routine health management information system (HMIS) reporting from all levels of service provision has been largely incomplete over long time periods and often inappropriately summarized by cause or age. To overcome the perennial inadequacies of routine HMIS data we selected a sub-set of hospitals for a more detailed inpatient review where each hospital had records available for investigation and represented the malaria ecologies typical of the country. The four hospitals selected for review are shown in Figure 1. These are located at Salima in the Central Region of Malawi along Lake Malawi and Mwanza in the South Western Region of Malawi, all areas historically supporting high, intense perennial malaria transmission; Rumphi in the Northern Region and Zomba in the Southern Region both have historically moderate risks of malaria infection [39]. The characteristics of the locations of these four hospitals are summarized in Table 1 and defined by estimates of parasite prevalence within their catchment area between 2000 and 2010 [40]. Additional information is provided on the altitude and mean average annual rainfall at each site to provide a climatic context of the risks of malaria at each site.


Defining Hospital Catchment Areas

We computed catchment populations to standardise the admission data across the four hospitals. Previously we have attempted to define catchment areas using addresses of admissions in Kenya [41] which were used to develop a representative catchment radius and applied to hospital data from Uganda [42]. A slightly different approach was used here. All higher level facilities (hospitals) surrounding each study site were selected from the Malawi Health facility database [43]. The spatial positions of the hospitals within a region were assembled in ArcGIS version 9.3 (ESRI, Inc., Redland, CA, USA) to define nearest distance (Thiessen) polygons around each hospital assuming that all hospitals had an equally weighted draw on patients whose distances travelled were assumed to be Euclidian (in straight lines). This assumption was necessary because the precise shape of the hospital catchments are hard to empirically define as the only measures of health service use and travel distance are available from lower order facilities providing primary out-patient care [44][45][46][47][48][49][50][51] and not inpatient care which is likely to have different properties [45,48,52]. Thiessen polygons were defined based on the bisection of the perpendicular lines of each neighbouring hospital and represent polygons whose boundaries define the area that is closest to each point (i.e. hospital) relative to all other points.

Using the lowest level of administrative units available, Traditional Authorities, all units that intersected the boundaries of the Thiessen polygon of the study hospital were included and used as the first step in defining the hospital's catchment. In the second step, a provisional catchment was defined for each hospital using a radial distance of 30 km which had been found to capture over 90% of admissions in Kenya [41] and used to define catchments in Uganda [42]. The provisional catchment around each hospital setting were then modified depending on the mapped extents of travel barriers specifically those related to topography, bare areas, absence of road networks, and presence of non-navigable water bodies [53,54]. Finally we used the 1006100 m population density surface [55] to calculate a convex hull polygon that enclosed the areas occupied by 90% of the catchment populations. This final area was taken to represent the study site's physical catchment area and total population counts for the year 2000 were extracted in ARCGIS 9.3 (ESRI, Inc., Redland, CA, USA). These counts were corrected for the administrative level percentage of under-five populations and projected annually through to 2010 using sub-national inter-censal  Endemicity classes defined as in Hay et al. [69] where .40% is accepted as highly endemic. 2 Predicted estimates of PfPR from within the catchments of hospitals sites in Malawi using ARC GIS. 3 A digital elevation map (DEM) that has a resolution of 30 meters was used to define altitude (http://www.vterrain.org/Elevation/SRTM/). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0062214.t001 growth rates derived from the national censuses of 2008 in Malawi [56].


Paediatric Admission Review 2000-2010

At each selected hospital, paediatric ward in-patient registers were identified for most months from January 2000 to December 2010. Each admission entry in the registers was recorded on a tally sheet indicating the month of admission and whether a primary working diagnosis of malaria had been defined for the child or whether the admission diagnosis did not include an indication of malaria. We have restricted the data assembly to records of children less than five years because they bear the burden of severe malaria in most highly endemic African countries. Individual register entries were not reconciled with patient notes and we have assumed that the admission diagnosis remained the diagnosis upon which each admission was managed clinically. Slide confirmed malaria diagnoses at admission were not universally available within, nor between hospital sites, however we have assumed that most admissions were likely to have a blood film prepared preadmission. We remain uncertain about how, when available, parasitological results were used to guide diagnosis given the vagaries of presumed and parasitological diagnosis for in-patient paediatric case-management [57,58]. Our working definition of ''malaria'' was therefore patients admitted with a diagnosis of malaria, probably managed clinically as malaria during their admission but without documented parasitological confirmation. At one site (Salima) admission data were missing for the year 2000 because registers were damaged or misplaced and therefore unavailable for review and analysis is restricted to 2001 to 2010.

This was a routine audit from registers and something undertaken as part of routine activities. The data were assembled as anonymised counts, all the data were de-identified monthly tallies of hospital admissions therefore no patient level details were included.


Defining Hospital Catchment Endemicity and Climate

We have used parasite prevalence as a measure of transmission intensity at each hospital site selected for investigation. Parasite prevalence in children aged 2-10 years (PfPR 2-10 ) is a common metric of transmission intensity that is used universally and scales with paediatric malaria disease risks [59], clinical epidemiology [14,60] and can be used to predict the impact on transmission of malaria control [61,62]. We have used predictions of malaria transmission intensity recently developed to model the changing malaria endemicity in Malawi [40]. In brief, changes in transmission intensity between 2000 and 2010 were modeled using empirical data from over 1,000 community age-standardized parasite prevalence (PfPR 2-10 ) sample surveys undertaken during this period using a space-time Model Based Geostatistical framework with Bayesian inference and implemented using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm. Posterior distributions of the predicted mean PfPR 2-10 were generated at every unsampled 565 km grid in Malawi for the years 2000, 2005 and 2010 [40].

Rainfall is one of the most important climate variables that drive inter-and intra-annual periodicity in malaria admissions [63,64]. To examine the effects of rainfall, an important determinant of malaria transmission, monthly precipitation data were obtained from meteorological stations located within the catchment areas of hospitals or otherwise from the nearest possible metrological station with complete data.


Defining ITN/IRS Coverage

Data on the coverage of interventions during the study period are available from geo-located cluster sample survey data from national surveys and used here to explore the plausible correspondence between changing prevention strategies and disease incidence between hospital settings. We have used an average radial distance of 40 km around the hospitals for the purposes of obtaining a representative estimate of intervention coverage for the four Malawian hospital sites. Data on ITN and IRS coverage from clusters within a 40 km radius of each hospital were extracted in ARCGIS 9.2 (ESRI, Inc., Redland, CA, USA) from the national household sample Demographic Health Surveys (DHS) undertaken in 2000, 2004 and 2010 (Supporting Information Figure S1).


Statistical Models

Time-series analysis. To examine the long-term trends in admission rates we used monthly malaria admission data, standardized for under 5 population densities within each catchment areas, with moving average smoothing methods to identify any long-term trend signals within each temporal elevenyear series while filtering out short-term annual fluctuations and random variation. The smoothing technique achieves this by replacing each element of the time series by n neighboring elements, where n is the width of the smoothing ''window'' equal to 12 months. We employed a centered moving average including 6 observations before and 5 after the current time point and vice versa and taking an average value of this to compute the centred average. The ARMAX model was then applied [65], which is an autoregressive model of the empirical current value of the series against one or more prior values combined with a moving average of the current value modeled against the white noise (random shocks) of one or more prior values and includes explanatory variables. The established explanatory variables for malaria trend analysis included rainfall in the current and or preceding months, assembled from meteorological stations located close to each hospital, and changes in service use (captured by non-malaria admission rates) resulting in a predicted or smoothed malaria admission rate per month for each hospital site over the period 2000 to 2010. Before specifying the ARMAX model, tests and diagnostics were performed in the estimation of the models. Monthly malaria rates were tested for stationarity using the augmented Dickey Fuller test [66] with an appropriate lag. Model diagnostics and selection criteria were used to determine the most parsimonious model. Two goodness-of-fit criteria were used to guide model selection: Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Schwartz's Bayesian information criterion (BIC). The models with the lowest AIC and BIC were finally selected. All analysis was undertaken using STATA version 11.0 (Statacorp 2003, College Station, USA).