Methods

Genome sequences collection. The Vibrio DNA sequences used in this study were obtained from National Center for Biotechnology Information database (NCBI) (October, 2016). A total of 1880 genomes representing sixty-four Vibrio species covered a variety of environments and wide geographic (>30,000 km) and temporal scales (>100 years) of isolation (Table S1, for genome details). We filtered out low quality assemblies which had N 50 scores of <10 kbp and/or consisted of more than 400 contigs. Moreover, we included a collection of thirteen bacteriophage genome sequences belonging to the family Inoviridae. Accession numbers for each individual selected genome sequence were included in the Supplementary Table S1.

Prophage-like element database construction. Prophage-like sequences were identified and selected by running available bacterial genomes in PHASTER (PHAge Search Tool) 36 . Because of their small sizes (typically between 5 to10 kb), some inoviruses were detected using a manual procedure by searching for similarity to known filamentous phages (See Supplementary Table S1  Output FASTA files containing prophage nucleotide sequences were subsequently subjected to a final manual review, including information about Vibrio species, specific strain and completeness (Complete, questionable or incomplete). Assessment of the completeness of the prophage was based on three specific criteria. Firstly, the genomic similarity of phage-related genes with prophage sequences deposited in the PHASTER database. Secondly, the presence of phage-related genes in a DNA sequence should be >50% of the total ORFs. Thirdly, the presence of specific phage-related cornerstone proteins (Integrase, fiber, tail, capsid, terminase, protease and lysin), attachment sites, tRNA or short nucleotides repeats should give a score of 10 for each key gene found. Based on these criteria a score value was calculated for each prophage sequence. A specific DNA sequence was considered a complete prophage-like element when the score was above 90 (See details 36 ). Finally, the updated files were merged into a unique local custom database using Geneious V.10.1.3 38 . Although the current annotation was generally maintained, certain ORFs were re-analyzed using BLASTP and the annotation updated 37 . The Vibrio prophage-like elements database is available as MG-RAST database at library mgl583439.

Prophage-like element sequences were annotated by using MG-RAST server (version 3.3) 39 . The ORFs were distributed into different categories, according to similarity with protein databases.


Identification of orthologs and ecologically relevant genes in prophage-like elements. The Vibrio prophage-like element database was screened for virulence factors, antibiotic resistance, niche adaptation and metabolic genes by tblastn alignment of annotated ORFs using BLAST + v2.2.24, with default parameters (E-value 10 −4 , amino acid identity >30%). Also, virulence or fitness factors previously identified in the fish pathogen V. anguillarum 7 and V. parahaemolyticus 27 were included in this study. Specific proteins in each of the orthologous groups were manually inspected using BLAST 40  CRISPR array identification. In V. anguillarum, CRISPR arrays had previously been identified and analyzed 22 . Repeat sequences were compared by WebLogo analysis, a Web-based application that generates graphical representations (logos) of the patterns within a multiple-sequence alignment 43 . Spacer sequences were aligned to the prophage-like elements using ClustalW 42 in Geneious v.10.1.3 38 .

Phylogenetic analyses of Zot-like proteins.To reveal the phylogenetic relationship among genes encoding the identified zonula occludens toxins (Zot), we selected the 702 zot genes from complete inovirus sequences in our prophage-like element database. Deduced Zot amino acid sequences were aligned using Clustal W version 2.0 42 and phylogeny was inferred using Maximum Likelihood (1,000 bootstrap replicates) in Geneious version 10.1.338 .


for phage genome details) by BLASTP (requiring an e-value <0.001). When at least three core ORFs from inoviridae family (Relative to CTX prophage: ADE80683.1 [RstA]; AAF29545.1 [OrfU]; YP_004286238.1 [ace]) were found in a window of 5-10 kb, reannotation of putative prophage ORFs was done by performing a BLASTP search against GenBank database 37 . The beginning and end of a specific prophage genome was estimated based on the annotation of the surrounding genes.