Meterials and methods


Design of the AI-based internet hospital pharmacy services

This study was carried out at Eye & ENT Hospital of Fudan University. In April 2020, its internet hospital was approved for a business license and officially launched on 23 June 2020. Initially, it was limited to self-pay patients and gradually expanded its range of users by realizing Shanghai medical insurance settlement. Thus far, there have been over 200,000 internet prescriptions, providing pharmacy services to over 100,000 people nationwide in China.

Before launching internet hospital, we learned from the experiences of the top ten hospitals in the 2020 Fudan edition of China's best comprehensive hospital ranking (Hospital Management and Fudan Institute., 2020;Li et al., 2022). Information was obtained through the official websites, Alipay Life, WeChat and published literature of these hospitals (Li et al., 2020;Li et al., 2020;Hu et al., 2020;Li et al., 2021;Zhi et al., 2021;Zhang, 2022). Thus, the framework of the AI-based internet hospital pharmacy services was concentrated on improving prescription review, convenient drug collection and medication consultation. The data interface was accomplished by our hospital's information technology department and the corresponding software company.


Prescription preview with AI

The preparation of prescription preview can be traced back to September 2020. First, prescription preview rules were formulated based on drug labels, clinical protocols and guidelines, clinical pathways, national formulary, national prescription laws and regulations etc. Then, AI preview was realized using a rational medication monitoring system developed by Beijing Puhua health technology Co., Ltd. The prescription preview process is shown in Figure 1. Three steps were designed to ensure the accuracy of prescriptions, including AI preview, pharmacists preview and double check when dispensing. Moreover, unreasonable prescriptions would be rejected and recorded. Two different levels of problem prescriptions were highlighted, namely, alerts, and interceptions. Absence of a reasonable indication and overdose were defined to be warned, as well as drug-drug interactions and repeated medication. However, those prescriptions cannot be sent when there were any contraindications. After that, the rational medication monitoring system was embedded into the internet hospital system to test the effectiveness of AI-preview. Prescriptions approved by AI were required to be 100% qualified before going live with it.


Picking up medicine and medicine pick-up code

To ensure the safety and effectiveness of patient medications, refrigerated drugs, fragile drugs, drugs with high risks, and drugs requiring special management and storage requirement at 2-8°C, must be picked up offline based on the "Guidelines for the Construction of Internet Hospitals in Shanghai Municipal Hospitals." Therefore, the list of drugs that must be picked up offline was made. Other deliverable drugs were entrusted to a third-party pharmaceutical company for delivery. Based on the drug availability in the third-party pharmaceutical company, the drug distribution has two modes: "Large warehouse" and "storage." The "large warehouse" mode refers to the direct delivery from the warehouse of the pharmaceutical company when the drug is available in the warehouse; the "storage" mode refers to the delivery mode when the drug is unavailable in the warehouse of the pharmaceutical company, and they must pick up drugs from the hospital first and store these drugs in their drugstore. When drugs are dispatched, the logistics information is updated in real-time and patients can check the logistics information on the internet hospital system. Also, the way patients chose to pick up their medications was recorded in the internet hospital. Then the data could be exported in xlsx format and analyzed. Additionally, the idea of quick response (QR) code that represented a specific offline self-pick-up order was proposed on the occasion of zone lockdown in April 2022 and carried out by the information technology department of EENT hospital. The prescription details that directly associated with the offline self-pick-up order number were then written into the QR code and could be read through the dispensing system.


Medication consultation service

The medication consultation service was supported by Shanghai Liankong network technology Co., Ltd. A volunteer team of licensed pharmacists with extensive clinical experience provided free medication consultation services online. Prior to beginning this service, all pharmacists received standardized Frontiers in Pharmacology frontiersin.org training to handle patient questions. If a patient asked questions regarding a disease diagnosis, the pharmacist would guide the patient to consult a clinician. For complex questions, pharmacists would discuss with other pharmacists to ensure that the answers were correct. The basic information of medication consultants and the questions they asked can be recorded, which can be exported to xlsx format. Further analyses were performed to understand the effectiveness of medication counseling.