Materials and Methods


Design and Participants

Adults with medical record diagnoses of prediabetes and metabolic syndrome (n = 116) were enrolled in a single-arm, prospective, longitudinal study to assess the effects of the continuous care intervention on markers of metabolic health (Clinicaltrials.gov (accessed on 19 February 2021) Identifier NCT02519309). For the purpose of this analysis, prediabetes was defined as HbA1c < 6.5% concurrent with metformin use or HbA1c between 5.7% and 6.4%, inclusive, without the use of glycemic control medication to align with the American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care, given that metformin is recommended in patients with prediabetes [13]. Participants whose characteristics did not meet the defined criteria for prediabetes at baseline testing (n = 20) were excluded from the following analyses; this included patients whose baseline HbA1c was <5.7% without medication and patients who were found to be taking an antihyperglycemic medication other than metformin during the baseline history and physical assessment (Supplemental Figure S1). Ninety-six participants were included in the analysis.

Participants between the ages of 21 and 65 years were recruited via clinical referrals, local media advertising, and word of mouth in Lafayette, Indiana and the surrounding area between August 2015 and March 2016. Individuals with advanced renal, hepatic, or cardiac dysfunction, dietary fat intolerance, or who were pregnant or planned to become pregnant were excluded from the study. The Franciscan Health Lafayette Institutional Review Board approved this study. All participants provided written informed consent.


Intervention

Details pertaining to the continuous care intervention were previously published [14][15][16]. In brief, participants accessed a mobile web-based application (app) which connected them to their remote care team consisting of a health coach who provided support for nutrition and behavior change and a medical provider who monitored the biomarkers and managed diabetes and hypertension medications. Participants self-selected to receive their education via either regularly scheduled on-site group classes consisting of presentations and group discussions or via web-based education modules consisting of videos and written materials viewed online at the participant's choice of time and pace. The app also provided educational resources and access to peer social support via an online community regardless of the education delivery modality selected. Initial nutrition guidance included restricting dietary carbohydrates to fewer than 30 g per day, consumption of 1.5 g dietary protein per kg reference body weight daily, and consumption of dietary fat to satiety with the goal of achieving nutritional ketosis defined as blood beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) ≥ 0.5 mmol/L. The majority of dietary carbohydrates consisted of non-starchy vegetables, dairy, and/or nuts; participants selected individual foods based on their dietary preferences and philosophies. To monitor adherence to carbohydrate restriction and allow providers to manage medications, participants recorded blood glucose and BHB (Precision Xtra, Abbott; Alameda, CA, USA) and blood pressure (BP742 N, Omron Healthcare, Inc.; Lake Forest, IL, USA), if hypertension was diagnosed, in the app. Body weight was recorded in the app via cellular-connected scale (BT003, Body Trace; New York, NY, USA). Initially, participants measured and recorded biomarkers daily, and the care team adjusted the BHB target and frequency of reporting over time to meet individual health needs and goals.


Assessments

Participants underwent a history and physical examination and laboratory testing to obtain baseline and one-and two-year follow-up measures. Trained clinic staff assessed height, waist circumference, and blood pressure. Weight was uploaded to the app via a cellular connected scale provided to each participant. Trained staff at a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment (CLIA) certified laboratory obtained blood from participants in a fasting state and analyzed blood samples for glucose, insulin, HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C), triglycerides, alanine transaminase (ALT), and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) on the day of sample collection or from stored serum.

We assigned the presence of conditions as follows: normoglycemia: HbA1c < 5.7% without glycemic control medication; prediabetes: HbA1c < 6.5% concurrent with metformin use or HbA1c between 5.7% and 6.4%, inclusive; type 2 diabetes: HbA1c ≥ 6.5% with or without glycemic control medication or HbA1c < 6.5% with glycemic control medication other than metformin; MetS: presence of three of five diagnostic criteria (BMI > 30 kg/m 2 was substituted for waist circumference when it was not available) [17,18]; obesity ≥ class II: BMI ≥ 35 kg/m 2 ; suspected hepatic steatosis: NAFLD-Liver Fat Score > −0.640 [19].


Statistical Methods

In this pilot study, we assessed the retention in the intervention and adherence to nutrition guidance. We assessed the outcome variables for assumptions of normality and linearity using Kline's guidelines [20] and transformed variables as noted in the tables. We performed independent sample t-tests to examine the differences in baseline characteristics between those who selected on-site versus web-based education and between completers versus dropouts.

We calculated crude incidence of first occurrence of type 2 diabetes diagnosis and normoglycemia per 100 person-years and used the Kaplan-Meier approach to estimate the cumulative incidence [21] of type 2 diabetes and normoglycemia at two years. We assessed the changes in dichotomous outcome variables over time using generalized estimating equations (GEE) with binary logistic models and unstructured covariance matrices, and we estimated the missing values with 40 imputations [22] from logistic regression to allow intent-to-treat analysis. For continuous outcome variables, we utilized linear mixed effects models (LMM) to obtain the estimated marginal means and assess changes over the two-year follow-up period. The LMM uses an intent-to-treat principle which includes all available data and estimates the model parameters through a maximum-likelihood approach. An unstructured covariance matrix was specified. Covariates in GEE and LMM included baseline age, sex, race, and metformin use. LMM and chi-square were also utilized to assess the two-year clinical biomarker and retention differences, respectively, between those who selected on-site and web-based education. Significance level was set at 0.05 and was adjusted in each analysis with related variables to account for the number of contrasts using the Bonferroni method. We performed statistical analyses with SPSS statistical software (version 25.0, Armonk, NY, USA). Means are reported with (standard deviation) or ±standard error.