Methods


Data preparation

We obtained a copy of the updated 2004 NCI formaldehyde cohort study data from NCI. The 2004 NCI cohort file contained the same demographic, work history and formaldehyde exposure data for 25,619 workers first employed at one of 10 industrial plants before January 1, 1966 as the file associated with NCI's 1994 update (1994 NCI cohort file). We were informed by NCI that the only differences between the 1994 and 2004 NCI cohort files were the updated vital status, cause of death, and date of death variables. All event dates (e.g., birth, hire, termination, and death) were limited to month and year to protect subject confidentiality. Further details about the NCI study are provided in Beane Freeman et al. [8] and Blair et al. [9]. Due to the complexity of reformatting the earlier 1994 NCI cohort data file in 2005 to enable analysis with the OCMAP-Plus cohort analysis program [29], and the lack of a common ID (for confidentiality purposes), we matched all deceased employees from the 2004 NCI cohort data file to the 1994 OCMAP cohort data file on all possible variables. We matched 13,883 of 13,951 deaths, or 99.5 %, exactly to the 1994 OCMAP file. For the remaining 68 deaths, we manually selected the closest matches within the 1994 OCMAP file. After the matching was completed, we updated vital status, cause of death, and date of death information for all 13,951 deaths so that the mortality follow-up period was through 2004.

Additionally, we created a new OCMAP file from the 2004 NCI cohort file to ensure that our matched OCMAP file was accurate. This new OCMAP file contained only a portion of the variables as the reformatting was too complex and redundant. We subsequently performed extensive cross-checks and replicated key NCI findings to establish the comparability of the files. Our total person-year count differed by only 11.0 or 0.00001 % of the total person-years reported by NCI [8]. We also matched the plant-specific numbers of subjects, total deaths and deaths from NPC. Compared with Beane Freeman et al. [30], which provided more detailed information, we also matched exactly on median duration of follow-up years (42 years) and median length of employment (2.6 years).

Our general NPC analyses were based on the total of 11 NPC deaths reported in the NCI study. As in our original reanalyses [22,23], and unlike Hauptmann et al. [5] and Beane Freeman et al. [8], we did not omit from our exposure-response analyses the one NPC death in Plant 11 that had been recoded to oropharyngeal cancer based on findings of a medical record confirmation reported by Lucas [31]. Our concerns about this partial correction of death certificate information are reported elsewhere [32].


Statistical analyses General methods

In general, our external and internal comparisons of NPC mortality in the NCI 2004 FA cohort were conducted along the lines of our previous reanalysis of NPC [22] and leukemia [33] in the NCI 1994 FA cohort. A main goal was to determine whether our earlier findings were corroborated in this updated reanalysis. Specific goals were to address the three methodological issues noted above, as described below Our results for NCIreplicated analyses differ slightly from those reported by Beane Freeman et al. [8] because the 2004 NCI cohort file did not include the day of events (dates of birth and death and work history dates). We estimated day of event by using the midpoint of the month (15). Also, differences for NCI-replicated exposure-response models occurred because we fit our models with exact conditional logistic regression; whereas, NCI used asymptotic Poisson regression models. Finally, as noted above, our exposure-response models used all 11 NPC deaths; whereas, NCI's were based on 10 deaths. To facilitate comparison, we also present results based on these 10 NPC deaths only.


External mortality comparisons for NPC

For NPC, we computed both U.S. and regional (local county) rate-based SMRs and their 95 % confidence intervals (CI, based on the Poisson distribution) by each of the 10 plants in the NCI study and by two plant groups (Plant 1 vs. Plants 2-10). SMRs were standardized for race/ethnicity, sex, age group, and time period. Local county area mortality rates for each of the 10 plants in the NCI study were obtained from the Mortality and Population Database System (MPDS) developed at the University of Pittsburgh [34]. For each study plant, the local county area was defined as the county or group of counties surrounding the plant from which most of the work force was drawn (see Marsh and Youk [34] for plant code, plant locations and counties comprising the regional rates). Because MPDS rates are not available before 1950, we applied 1950-1954 rates to previous observation periods for plants that started before 1950. This approximation should have negligible effect on SMRs, as only 3.3 % of the total person-years at risk in the cohort occurred before 1950 [34]. The proportional contribution of expected NPC deaths is likely to be even smaller because these early person-years are associated with relatively young age groups.

We also computed regional rate-based SMRs and 95 % CIs for NPC by each of the four formaldehyde metrics (highest peak, average intensity, cumulative, and duration) used in the NCI study 4 . We used the NCI exposure categories for highest peak exposure (the NCI data were pre-coded into fixed categories) and an alternative categorization for the remaining metrics (approximate tertiles of formaldehyde exposure among all NPC deaths in exposed workers, UPitt categories). Unlike the approximate 60th and 80th percentile cutpoints used by NCI, our categorization produces a more even distribution of NPC deaths among the exposed categories. When evaluating NCI exposure categories we used only 10 NPC deaths as the NCI researchers did in their analyses. We used all 11 NPC deaths in analyses applying UPitt categories.


Internal mortality comparisons

In the NCI study, Poisson regression based on asymptotic estimation was used to examine exposure-response relationships by comparing internal cohort rates for NPC. Alternatively, we used relative risk (RR) regression modeling with both exact and asymptotic estimation to investigate the dependence of the internal cohort rates (modeled as time to death) for NPC on combinations of both categorical and continuous formaldehyde metrics, with adjustment for potential confounding factors through matching or stratification. Study data from the entire 1934-2004 period were modeled. Risk sets were explicitly constructed from the cohort data with age as the primary time dimension, using the RISKSET program module in OCMAP-Plus [29]. To adjust for year of birth ("cohort" or time period) effects, risk sets were caliper-matched, within one year, on date of birth.

Regression models included terms for race/ethnicity (white/black), sex, and payroll category (wage, salary, unknown) to adjust for these potential confounding factors. Trends in RRs relative to the exposure measures considered were based on likelihood ratio tests using either exposed workers or unexposed and exposed workers.

Relative risk regression models were fit using exact and asymptotic conditional logistic regression. The conditional logistic regression likelihood is equivalent to the partial likelihood of Cox regression [35] which can be understood as a refinement of Poisson regression [36]. While the exact models are more appropriate for the small numbers of NPC deaths involved in this analysis, we also ran asymptotic models to enable more direct comparisons with the asymptotic Poisson regression models run by Beane Freeman et al. [8]. Categorical FA exposure models were run in Stata/SE 13.1 [37] and continuous FA exposure models were run in SAS 9.4 [38]. The internal comparisons used the same exposure metric categorization scheme described for the external comparisons. All formaldehyde exposure metrics in the external and internal mortality comparisons incorporated the same 15-year lag period used by NCI. We addressed Methodological Issues 1, 2, and 3 within the internal comparisons.

Methodological issue 1 For Issue 1, we conducted and compared exposure-response analyses using both the lowest FA exposure category (as done by NCI) and the unexposed exposure category as the baseline. We argued (Issue 4 in [23]) that it is inappropriate to exclude unexposed workers from internal analyses as done by Beane Freeman et al. [30]. All workers are from the same factories and, as noted by McLaughlin et al. [39] in a response to a letter by Hauptmann and Ronckers [40], lagging of FA exposure by 15 years results in contributions to the unexposed category from workers who were, in fact, exposed to FA. Indeed, most of the person-time at risk allocated to the unexposed category represents years of follow-up of workers who were eventually exposed to FA. Therefore, it is of major interest to examine whether the statistically significant positive associations between FA exposure and NPC deaths as described by NCI in Bean Freeman et al. [8] can be replicated if unexposed workers are not dropped prior to analyses.

Methodological issue 2 For Issue 2, we avoided the problems associated with using continuous variable trend tests for categorical variables (as done by Beane Freeman et al. [8]; see Issue 5 in Marsh et al. [11] for background and details), by properly matching the trend test with the method of analysis. That is, we modeled the continuous form of the FA metrics (excluding highest peak) to produce a slope estimate that was evaluated for statistical significance (linear trend) via a likelihood ratio test. We used the actual continuous FA exposure in our asymptotic models (referred to in tables as Score 4); whereas, due to the computationally intensive permutation methods inherent in our exact models, we used the median FA exposure value associated with each category of the corresponding pseudo-continuous FA exposure metric (Score 3). As in our earlier reanalysis [23], a pseudo-continuous form of the NCI highest peak exposure variable was defined by scoring each of the categories used by Beane Freeman et al. [8] with the arithmetic mean of the interval, including a reasonable assumption about the score for the last open-ended interval (Scores: unexposed = 0, >0-1.9 = 0.95, 2.0-3.9 = 3.0, 4.0 + = 6.0) (Score 2). Likewise, we also modeled the categorical form of each FA metric and evaluated trend via a likelihood ratio test based on the category-specific score statistics. For all exposure metrics, we used the scores 1, 2, 3, 4 to represent the four categories of FA exposure, respectively (Score 1). In each exposureresponse analysis, the main effect of the corresponding exposure metric was assessed with a global test.


Methodological issue 3

The key finding in our previous reanalyses of NPC mortality in the 1994 NCI cohort [22] was that NCI's earlier conclusion of a possible causal association between FA exposure and NPC mortality risk [5] was driven heavily by a large, statistically significant excess in NPC mortality risk for employees from Plant 1. In a later reanalysis using a continuous form of the highest peak FA exposure metric, Marsh et al. [23] showed that the internal analyses of Hauptmann et al. [5] were non-robust and mis-specified as the authors did not account for a statistically significant interaction structure between plant group (Plant 1 vs. Plants 2-10) and highest peak FA exposure. Subsequently, to address plant heterogeneity for NPC mortality risks in the 2004 NCI FA cohort, Beane Freeman et al. [8] refuted the findings of Marsh et al. [23], and through an "influence analysis" concluded that they found ". . .no evidence of plant heterogeneity for a broad group of metrics, including peak exposure." We maintain that Beane Freeman et al. [8] neither correctly interpreted the results of their own influence analysis nor correctly interpreted the results of the interaction evaluation performed by Marsh et al. [23]. For more details see Issue 6 in Marsh et al. [11].

To further address this issue of interaction structure using the 2004 NCI FA cohort data, we extended our earlier models [23], which were based only on the continuous form of the highest peak FA exposure metric, to include continuous forms of the other FA metrics considered (duration of exposure, average intensity of exposure and cumulative exposure). We also considered both exact and asymptotic estimation as described above. Our continuous form of the highest peak FA exposure metric described above enabled the fitting of an interaction term with the plant group indicator despite analyzing sparse data. We fit different specifications of the interaction model and modeled the continuous form peak exposure metric for Plant 1 and Plants 2-10 separately to gain insights into the meaning of the interaction terms derived from models based on all plants. Finally, we fit interaction models based on the plant group indicator and average FA exposure intensity, cumulative FA exposure or duration of FA exposure. We always evaluated all 11 NPC deaths in these models addressing the interaction issue.