Methods


Mosquito culture

Mosquito larvae of the Liverpool strain IB12 of Ae. aegypti and the Johannesburg strain of C. quinquefasciatus were reared in an insectary on a 12 h day/night cycle at 75% RH at 28°C in 25 The workflow is based on the evolving "genome-to-lead" component of the PIDP first described in Meyer et al. [11]. High-throughput (HTP), cell-based screens expressing arthropod D 1 -like DARs (Target Panel) are employed to identify chemistries active against one or more arthropod targets. Vector-selective chemistries are identified using counter screens expressing the human hD 1-5 and the honeybee DAR (Nontarget Panel). Subsequently, the in vivo toxicity of chemistries is confirmed in single-point dose and concentration response screens against mosquito larvae. Top hits are evaluated for activity against the adult stage of one or more vector species and taxon-level selectivity for the dipteran suborders Nematocera and Brachycera, and the subclass Acari. Information from structure activity relationship studies is used to direct iterative chemical screens. Chemical leads may enter the "Lead-to-Product" phase of the pipeline. New components of the pipeline described in the present study include the pharmacologically characterized CqDOP2 target, the AgDOP2, PpDOP2 and GmDOP2 targets identified from assembled genome sequences (S2 Fig), and the C. quinquefasciatus larval screen. Remaining components are the subject of works in review [15] and ongoing efforts. Abbreviations: Aa, Aedes aegypti; Ag, Anopheles gambiae; Am, Apis mellifera; Cq, Culex quinquefasciatus; Gm, Glossina morsitans; Is, Ixodes scapularis; Pp, Phlebotomus papatasi; NP, natural product. x 40 cm plastic pans (150 larvae per pan) on hamster pellets (Ae. aegypti) or ground flake fish food (C. quinquefasciatus). Adult Ae. aegypti and C. quinquefasciatus that eclosed under this rearing regimen had an average wing length of 3.4 mm (measured as in [25]) and 3.2 mm (measured as in [26]), respectively, suggesting diet was sufficient and larval crowding effects were minimal.


CqDOP2 receptor sequence and molecular characterization

The amino acid sequences of DARs from multiple arthropods were used to search the C. quinquefasciatus genome using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (tBLASTn, [27]). Gene models were confirmed by sequencing of amplified RT-PCR products following procedures described in Meyer et al [11]. Briefly, total RNA was extracted from adult C. quinquefasciatus females and treated with RNase-free DNase. RT-PCR amplification was performed using the SuperScript One-Step RT-PCR kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and the CqDOP2-specific primers CqDOP2_1F: 5'-ATGATGACTACGAATGCAACTGATTAC-3' and CqDOP2_1R: 5'-CTAAATGTACGTCTGCTCGCAC-3'. RT-PCR products separated by electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel were excised and cloned using the TOPO TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Purified plasmids from the resulting clones were sequenced at the Purdue Genomics Core Facility (PGFC). DNA sequences were used to predict full-length coding regions and manual annotation was performed using Artemis software (version 9) [28]. The CqDOP2 conceptual protein sequence was aligned to that of AaDOP2 using ClustalW [29] and used to identify conserved amino acid residues and predict protein structural features [22,30,31].

To determine receptor expression in different life stages, total RNA was isolated from C. quinquefasciatus eggs, L4 larvae, pupae, and 5-day old adults (female and male) using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and following kit protocols, including DNase treatment. Generation of cDNA was performed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad). Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used with cDNA template, primers CqDOP2_1F and CqDOP2.2R: 5'-CCAGCAGTGGAAGATAGAACG-3', Taq polymerase (Phusion, New England Biolabs) and the following thermo-cycling conditions: 35 cycles at 94°C, 45 s; 55°C, 45 s; 72°C, 2 min. Subsequent products were separated by gel electrophoresis and photographed (EpiChemi II Darkroom, UVP Laboratory Products). Products of approximately 700 bp in length were excised, purified (MinElute Gel Extraction Kit, Qiagen), and sequenced at the PGCF.

A neighbor-joining phylogenetic analysis was conducted using amino acid sequences of arthropod and mammalian GPCRs retrieved from GenBank. MEGA6 [32] was used to align and perform tree construction according to the procedure of Hall [33]. Diuretic hormone 44 receptor 1 (D. melanogaster) was used as an outgroup. Bootstrap analysis (1000 replicates) was performed as an estimate of branch reliability.


In silico assessment of DOP2 DAR targets from additional dipteran vectors of NTDs

To assess the potential of expanding the PIDP pipeline to orthologous DOP2 targets from a range of key dipteran vectors, additional tBLASTn searches of the assembled genomes of An. gambiae, P. papatasi (www.vectorbase.org) and G. morsitans [34] were performed using AaDOP2 and CqDOP2 sequences. The conceptual amino acid sequences for the resultant gene models, AgDOP2, PpDOP2, and GmDOP2, were aligned with AaDOP2 and CqDOP2 using ClustalW [29] and conserved structural features were predicted as described above.


Pharmacological characterization of CqDOP2 and AaDOP2

For functional characterization of the mosquito receptors, CqDOP2 and AaDOP2 were synthesized by Genscript (Piscataway, NJ) and cloned into the expression vector pcDNA3.1+ (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Stable cell lines expressing the receptors in HEK293 cells were generated as described previously for AaDOP2 [11]. The AaDOP2 expressing cells used here were from the same clone previously utilized for AaDOP2 characterization [11]. Briefly, HEK293-CRELuc cells were plated in Dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% bovine calf serum, 5% fetal clone I (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA), 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Life Technologies, Grand Island NY) and 2 μg/ml puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), transfected, and then subjected to selection with G418 (600 μg/ml). G418-resistant clones were selected and screened for receptor expression in the cAMP activated luciferase (CRELuc) reporter cell line construct [11]. For pharmacological characterization of receptor activity, cryopreserved cells stably expressing AaDOP2 (10,000 cells/well), CqDOP2 (5,000 cells/well), or human D 1 (5,000 cells/well) were thawed, washed, and re-suspended in assay buffer (Hank's balanced salt solution, Hyclone, Logan, UT) supplemented with 20 mM 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES, Hyclone, Logan, UT) and 0.1% bovine serum albumin (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA), seeded in white 384 well plates (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA), and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Compounds were serially diluted in assay buffer containing 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX, final concentration 0.5 mM), added to the plates, and incubated for 1 h at 25°C to allow for cAMP accumulation. Reactions were stopped and cAMP was measured by a homologous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF) assay according to the manufacturer's recommendations (Cisbio, Bedford, MA). Fluorescence was read on a Synergy4 plate reader (Bio-Tek, Winooski, VT).

Dopamine hydrochloride, histamine dihydrochloride, 5-hydroxytryptamine hydrochloride (serotonin), (±)-octopamine hydrochloride, tyramine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), (-)-epinephrine bitartrate, and L (-)-norepinephrine bitartrate (Research Biochemical International, Natick, MA) were used for initial receptor characterization studies. Antagonist profiles were generated by adding serially diluted antagonists followed by dopamine (3 μM for AaDOP2and CqDOP2-, and 0.5 μM for hD 1 -expressing cells). The antagonists amitriptyline hydrochloride, asenapine maleate, (±) butaclamol hydrochloride, chlorpromazine hydrochloride, doxepin hydrochloride, cis-(Z)-flupenthixol dihydrochloride, SCH23390 hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and amperozide hydrochloride (Tocris bioscience, Ellisville, MO) were selected based on previous chemical screens against AaDOP2 and subsequent bioassays against Ae. aegypti larvae [11,13]. All serial dilutions were carried out using the Precision liquid handling station (BioTek, Winooski, VT). Data were collected from a minimum of three independent experiments conducted in duplicate. Statistical analysis of data was conducted with GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA).


In vivo C. quinquefasciatus and Ae. aegypti bioassays

A panel of nine AaDOP2 antagonists was selected based on toxicity determined from singlepoint dose, high-throughput screens against Ae. aegypti larvae [13,15]. Compounds were evaluated in parallel in concentration-response assays against third-instar larvae (L3) of C. quinquefasciatus and Ae. aegypti at room temperature (23-25°C). Larvae were transferred using a plastic pipette to the wells of a 24-well tissue culture plate (Corning Inc., Corning NY) (five larvae per well) containing 1 ml de-ionized water and 400, 200, 100, 50, or 25 μM test compound or water only as the control. Antagonists were diluted in water to the desired concentration immediately before transfer to tissue culture plates. Larval mortality was determined every 30 min for the first 3 h, then daily at 24, 48, and 72 h post-exposure. Plates were gently shaken and larvae were lightly touched with a sterile probe (up to three times, as required) and stringent criteria were established for scoring such that larvae that failed to respond to both stimuli were recorded as dead. Four technical replicates were performed per dose, and each bioassay was performed a minimum of three times. Calculations of lethal concentration 50 (LC 50 ) and lethal time 50 (LT 50 ) were made using GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA).