MATERIALS AND METHODS

To investigate the association between coreceptor usage and neutralization capabilities of specific broadly neutralizing antibodies, we evaluated coreceptor usage on a large HIV-1 isolate panel introduced recently. 11 In that study, the neutralization capabilities of the broadly neutralizing antibodies VRC01, VRC-PG04, PG9, and PG16 were evaluated against a panel of 208 different HIV isolates from different subtypes, also including recombinant forms. Env sequences that covered the V3 region were available for only 199 of the 208 strains (see additional file 2, http://links.lww.com/QAI/A550). The coreceptor usage of these 199 strains was determined with the widely used prediction tool geno2pheno [coreceptor] . 12 The prediction model is based on the V3 sequence only and has been shown to have good performance 13 predicting both, phenotypic tropism and clinical response to treatment with R5 antagonists. geno2pheno [coreceptor] uses a linear support vector machine to predict whether a sequence is from an X4-capable or an R5 virus. The distance of the sequence to the separating hyperplane is transformed into a false-positive rate (FPR) to facilitate interpretability in terms of the confidence of the prediction. geno2pheno [coreceptor] reports the minimal FPR at which the sequence would be classified as X4-capable. In this calculation, X4-capable viruses are considered positive samples and R5 viruses are considered negative samples. It is general clinical practice to determine coreceptor usage based on this notion of FPR and on expert knowledge. In Europe, interpretation of tropism by geno2pheno [coreceptor] has been included in the guidelines for determining HIV-1 coreceptor tropism. 14 We adhered to the 10% FPR cutoff to distinguish X4-capable viruses from R5 viruses as recommended by the European Consensus Group on clinical management of HIV-1 tropism testing. 14 With the cutoffs of 5% and 15% as recommended by the German treatment guidelines, we achieved similar results. These guidelines suggest to classify all viruses with an FPR of less than 5% as X4-capable and all viruses with an FPR of 15% or more as R5 disregarding the viruses with FPRs between 5% and 15%. The numbers of sensitive and resistant strains, respectively, for the different antibodies using the 5%/15% cutoffs are shown in the Supplemental Digital Content (see Table S1, Supplemental Digital Content, http://links.lww.com/QAI/A550).

For 15 of the 199 isolates from the test panel, tropism information from biological experiments was available in the Los Alamos HIV database (see Table S2, Supplemental Digital Content, http://links.lww.com/QAI/A550). Using the 10% FPR threshold for geno2pheno [coreceptor] , 13 of 15 HIV variants are assigned the same tropism label. The two discordances are for borderline cases (between 5% and 15% FPR), but they do not change the numbers calculated from data presented in Table 1 because both variants are resistant to PG9/PG16 and tropisms are R5 and X4-capable, respectively. Note that the analysis in the Supplemental Digital Content does not include variants in the borderline region and still finds a similarly strong association between coreceptor tropism and PG9/PG16 resistance (see Table S1, Supplemental Digital Content, http://links.lww.com/QAI/A550).

To test whether the sensitivity/resistance to an antibody or serum is significantly different with regard to viral tropism, we computed P values using the two-sided Fisher exact test for the two-by-two contingency tables with resistant/sensitive as the row label and X4-capable/R5 as the column label using significance level a = 0.05. The null hypothesis is that there is no difference.

To investigate which amino acids at which position of the Env protein are associated with PG9 sensitivity, we performed the Fisher exact test for all observed amino-acid polymorphisms at all sequence locations. The q values were calculated according to Storey and Tibshirani 15 by conservatively assuming p 0 to be equal to 1. We performed the same analysis also for finding associations between observed amino-acid polymorphisms and predicted coreceptor usage (with the 10% FPR threshold introduced above).

To calculate the potential N-glycosylation sites, we used the tool N-glycosite. 16 The numbering of the positions is according to the Env amino-acid sequence of the HIV strain HXB2.

For comparing the effect of treatment by passive antibody transfer with broadly neutralizing antibodies, we computed the coreceptor usage FPR values for each variant of each treatment using geno2pheno [coreceptor] . 12 For each comparison between treatments (e.g., PGT128 versus 45-46GW), we tested whether there is a significant difference between the 2 sets of FPRs according to a Wilcoxon rank-sum test at a significance level of a = 0.05.