experimental

In order to investigate the effects of additives on the TSV filling process, the electrochemistry behaviours of the additives were quantitatively characterized using chronoamperometry (CA) test. Three additives, i.e. AESS, M and PNI were used as the suppressor, the accelerator and the leveler, respectively. The recorded current was used to analyse the effects of additives during the electrodeposition process for TSV filling. The CA measurements were conducted in a three-electrode cell with the base electrolyte (containing Cu 2+ 0.63 mol/L, CH 3 SO 3 − 0.21 mol/L, Cl − 50 ppm) and varying concentration of the additives, as shown schematically in Fig. 1. The working electrode was a platinum rotating disc electrode (RDE) (99.9% purity, and 1.5 mm radius surrounded by a PTFE shroud). The counter electrode (CE) was a platinum wire (99.9% purity, 1 cm length, and 1 cm radius). A mercurous sulfate electrode (MSE) was used as reference electrode (RE). All electrodes were placed in the plating bath and connected to an electrochemical workstation (Chi 600D). Negative potential was applied on the RDE, where the electrodeposition of Cu took place. As shown in Fig. 1, the RDE was connected to the negative pole of the power Figure 1. Schematic of the RDE setup for Chronoamperometry test (The additives were injected into base electrolyte using a syringe).  supply, while both the RE and the CE was connected to the positive pole. The CA tests were set at different potentials with a fixed rotation speed of 600 rpm. At the beginning, the CA test was carried out with the base electrolyte, under condition of a set working potential. After a response time (normally 40 s), the current response of the electrodeposition system gradually became stable. Once a steady-state current was attained, the additives were rapidly injected into the bulk using a syringe. As additives with inhibition effect on electrodeposition rate injecting into the electrolyte, the current response would drop with a certain degree. When a new steady state of the current response was attained, it was recorded. The drop in current response indicated the inhibition effect of the certain amount of the additive. The injection operation was repeated until the saturated value of the current response against the concentration of the additives was obtained. Two types of experiments were conducted: (a) single additive injection, (b) multiple additives injection.
E (V) C sup (ml/L) −0.6 0,
individual additive. As shown in Table 1, the CA tests for the suppressor were performed potentiostatically at −0.6 V, −0.55 V, −0.53 V, and −0.5 V, and the concentration of suppressor was varied from 0 ml/L to 10 ml/L. Considering the possibility that the suppressor had better inhibiting effect at high potential, additional investigations were made at −0.53 V and −0.5 V with the concentration ranged from 0 ml/L to 1 ml/L. Similar to the suppressor, CA tests were carried out to study the effects of the leveler and the accelerator on the copper electroplating. Table 2 and Table 3 list the experimental parameters of 4 groups of tests for leveler and 3 groups for accelerator, respectively. In the tables, E (V) denotes over-potential; C sup denotes the concentration of the suppressor; C acc denotes the concentration of the accelerator and C lev denotes the concentration of the leveler.

interaction of additives. In order to investigate the interaction of additives in the copper electrodeposition, CA tests with multiple additives were performed. Before the CA test commence, one kind of additive with a certain concentration was premixed into the electrolyte; another kind of additive was later injected into the electrolyte during the CA test process. As shown in Table 4, for the study of suppressor and accelerator interaction, the suppressor with concentration of 6.2 ml/L was premixed into the electrolyte, and when the CA test started, the concentration of the accelerator into the electrolyte was increased from 0 ml/L to 12 ml/L by injection. The interaction experiments were conducted each other in pairs in a similar fashion, as shown in Tables 5 and 6.   Table 4. CA test parameters for the interaction between the suppressor and the accelerator.  Table 5. CA test parameters for the interaction between the accelerator and the leveler.  www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/ Micro via filling by electrodeposition. Based on the results of the electrochemical analysis, experiments of micro via filling by electrodeposition were conducted. The effects of singular additive and multiple additives on micro via filling were studied in separate experiments ( Table 7). The base electrolyte was used in the same way as the electrochemical analysis experiments, the current density was set with 0.5 A/dm 2 , and the temperature was maintained at 25 °C.
E (V) C acc (ml/L) (premixed) C lev (ml/L) (inject) −0.6 1 0, 4,E (V) C sup (ml/L) (premixed) C lev (ml/L) (inject) −0.6 6.2 0, 4,