Slit Caliber model and simulation goals and expectations

We have developed a finite element structural model for the splenic sinus that provides for the veracity of our paradigm. The structural model is patterned closely after the microscopic images described above and, for example, as summarized by Groom et al. (2002). In this, we have incorporated several levels of detail in terms of boundary conditions imposed on the endothelial cells (ECs) of the sinus, e.g., as to whether their ends are fixed, with and without uniform stress fiber contraction (our Model 1); or with nonuniform stress fiber contraction and where the EC ends are allowed to rotate (our Model 2). Accounting for the contractility of the stress fibers causes a stiffening of ECs and if their contraction is asymmetric causes EC bending; both effects affect IES caliber. We again note that these contractility effects can account for the asynchronous action of the IESs of a given sinus, and indeed of even slits that are "nearest neighbors" in a given sinus, as observed by MacDonald et al. (1987), Groom et al. (2002). Our approach to describe the development of IES caliber is designed for clarity in that we first describe the essentially axisymmetric expansion of the sinus, and thereby the IES calibers, under the action of the all-around pressure P pull and then add the more complex effects of the process involving EC bending, that may be asymmetric due to the contractility of the stress fibers; the latter analysis is based on a numerically based finite element model and simulations. IES opening due to axisymmetric the all-around opening pressure P pull is called 0 s and that due to EC bending b s ; hence the total caliber is s = 0 s + b s .


Axisymmetric expansion of the sinus

The above solution given by Eqs. 4 may be used to estimate the general expansion of the ring fibers and thereby the sinus under the pulling pressure P pull . For this we again take = 0.5 and obtain

where r so and r si are the outer and inner radii of the ring fibers; note that r s would be taken as r s = 1∕2(r so + r si ) . Note that u r has the interpretation of an increase in r s and hence the r 0 s symbolism. We let r so = r si + t where t is the ring (7) u r = r 0 s ≈


2E

1 r s r 2 so r 2 si r 2 so − r 2 si P pull fiber thickness, assumed such that t ≪ r s ; this approximation accounts for the approximation in eq. 7. We then take t = 3 m for an estimate and arrive at the result To obtain an estimate for the change, i.e., increase, in slit caliber we take P pull = 200 Pa ≈ 1.5 mmHg and E = 10 kPa and r s = 8 m and find that r 0 s ≈ 1.28 m and hence the average of 12 slits has an expected increased caliber of 0 s = 2 r s ∕12 ≈ 0.67 m . To this axisymmetric expansion, we will add the additional displacements that arise due to EC, potentially asymmetric, bending where we fix the ring fibers positions in their axisymmetric locations.


Asymmetric sinus model and applied forces

The basic model is shown in Fig. 5, whereas details are as follows.

Model and simulation details:

1. Working sinus structural model (WSM) Although the essential structure of the venous sinus is clear, detailed dimensions are difficult to specify as we have noted above. We have therefore formulated a working structural model (WSM) that captures the essential features and is adjustable to accommodate dimensional sensitivity studies. We later adjust this model taking into account a broader range of imaging data on human splenic sinuses. The primary WSM is based on what appeared to us to be the most reliable dimension, viz. that of the sinus diameter, D S ; we take this to be ∼ 15 μm as listed in Table 1. We then use the conceptual schemas of Drenckhahn and Wagner (1986) and/or Mebius and Kraal (2005) and take EC length and diameter to
(8) r 0 s ≈ 3 4 r s t P pull E r s .
Fig. 5 FEM model of the sinus that resembles a barrel with 12 endothelial cell slats; constraints by ring cells are modeled by boundary conditions described in the text. Note that the sinus opens under the action of the outward pressure P pull as described in the text be L EC = 8−16 μm and D EC = 3 μm , respectively. We note that as the primary deformation mode is bending and that since the maximum bending deflection would scale as L 3 EC ∕D 4 EC , the expected EC deflections would be comparable to those with the somewhat uncertain "averages" of L EC ∼ 9 m and D EC ∼ 1.8−2 μm . We also note the sinus image of Gálfiová et al. (2009) in Fig. 1e that suggested that the EC length may be larger than the erstwhile estimated average of 9 m . The WSM, accordingly, has 12 ECs arranged around the sinus perimeter with the above dimensions as listed in Table 1. With these considerations, we later perform the bulk of our simulations using L EC = 8 μm.


Constraints by ring cells

The effective constraints provided by ring cells were modeled by boundary conditions described below. The boundary conditions define two basic models called Model 1 and 2 as noted above and explained below. 3. The FEM sinus section model was set up using a commercial package Abaqus (Dassault Systémes Simulia Corp., Providence, RI, USA). Quadratic, reducedintegration (C3D20R) elements were used. Contacts between adjacent ECs were also modeled wherever applicable. 4. ECs were modeled as linear elastic with a Young's modulus of in the range 2.5 kPa ≤ E ≤ 10 kPa and a nearly incompressible value for Poisson's ratio of = 0.45. 5. The pressure internal to the sinus was taken a s P s = 1.33 kPa ≈ 10 mmHg a n d o u t s i d e P p = 1.46 kPa ≈ 11 mmHg. 6. The effective puling pressure to the sinus was taken as P pull = 66.7−400 Pa (0.5-3 mmHg).


Boundary conditions on EC ends: ring fibers

Various boundary conditions were used to simulate the section of sinus modeled here; the section of sinus considered lies between two ring fibers that form complete hoops as discussed above. Results for three such models are presented here.

1. Model 1: In model 1, the ECs are fixed so that their endto-end lengths are held constant; likewise, their ends are prevented from rotating. This is a highly constrained configuration that is relaxed in Model 2. 2. Model 1a: In Model 1a, we allow uniform stress fiber contraction as illustrated in Fig. 6a. Stress fiber contraction stiffens the ECs as the results will demonstrate. However, as the schema of Fig. 3a suggests, the ring fibers are quite flexible in bending and allow the EC ends to rotate. Moreover, as the section of sinus we simulate is connected to what in comparison is a very long flexible tube-like structure, the end-to-end distance of the ECs may change with only modest resistance; we take this to allow for the small displacements due to the rotations at the ends of the ECs. The magnitudes of the contractions we impose are consistent with those reported by, e.g. Drenckhahn and Wagner (1986), Franke et al. (1984) and Nehls and Drenckhahn (1991), as listed in the tables below for various model studies. 
(b) (a)
B en di ng due to asymmetric con tra ct ilt y Fig. 6 a Symmetric contraction of stress fibers stiffens but does not bend ECs. b Asymmetric contraction of stress fibers causes stiffening and bending of ECs 3. Model 2: Due to the considerations above, in Model 2 we allow both rotation and axial motion of the EC ends. Furthermore, in Model 2 we implement the asymmetrical contraction of the stress fibers by allowing them to contract by various percentages; again these contractions are consistent with a variety of experimental reports noted above (Drenckhahn and Wagner 1986;Franke et al. 1984;Nehls and Drenckhahn 1991). These features of Model 2 are illustrated in Fig. 6b; we implement this in the FEM model by treating one half of the EC along its length to act as a contractile strip. Such asymmetrical contraction indeed induces bending and leads to the opening of slit caliber, but also causes the closing of adjacent slits, as described below.

In both models, it should be noted that the ECs are treated as essentially incompressible and as the results will illustrate this leads to an interesting bounding, with respect to material and structural properties, of the extent of slit opening.


Simulation goals and expectations

Simulations were carried out using our WSM model and a model in which L EC = 8 m ; EC lengths of O(∼ 8 m) are suggested by the SEM images of Fujita (1974) and Gálfiová et al. (2009), discussed above. A range of physiological relevant values for cell mechanical properties and driving pressures were used to explore the possible range of forecasted IES calibers, specifically to assess what is believed to be the observed range of O(0.8−1.5 μm) . Particular focus was placed on the role of asymmetrical SF contraction on IES caliber and the causes of the experimentally observed asynchronous IES opening. Figure 7 shows two views of the sinus and IES expansion based on our Model 1 and 1a design and using our WSM that takes L EC = 16 m ; note that the effects of uniform stress fiber contraction are also described; see also Supplementary Movie 1. Specific results for estimated slit caliber based on the maximum slit opening are listed in Table 2. We recall that to the maximum IES opening displacement, s , we must impose the 0 s due to axisymmetric sinus opening under the all-around pulling pressure P pull to arrive at a total IES opening of s = 0 s + b s ; this is explained in Section 4. Table 2 shows results for a range of pulling pressures, P pull , that clearly indicates a natural progression of slit caliber with increasing P pull . We note that, without stress fiber contraction, s may reach values in the range 1.3μm to which 0 s must be added; hence, total calibers in access of 1.8−1.9 μm are thereby envisioned. We note, however, that   this is strongly mitigated by the action of stress fiber uniform contraction as in Model 1a. With uniform stress fiber contraction, there is a monotonic trend of decreasing caliber as shown. Nonetheless, the total calibers predicted with the WSM that sets L EC = 16 μm are rather large and generally may slightly exceed the expected range of 1−1.5 μm ; based on the SEM evidence discussed above, we then used a value of L EC = 8 μm . We kept the EC-D at 3 μm for this larger set of simulations. Results for such cases are shown in Table 3. The results shown in Table 3 cover a wide range of P pull and percentage of stress fiber contraction as well as the stiffness of the ECs.