HYDRODYNAMICAL SIMULATIONS AND MOCK SAMPLES

We use a set of three hydrodynamical simulations run with GADGET-2 and its new fastest version GADGET-3, a parallel tree Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) code that is based on the conservative 'entropy-formulation' of SPH (Springel & Hernquist 2002;Springel 2005). The simulations cover a cosmological volume (with periodic boundary conditions) filled with an equal number of dark matter and gas particles. Radiative cooling and heating processes are followed for a primordial mix of hydrogen and helium following the implementation of Katz, Weinberg & Hernquist (1996). We assume a mean Ultra Violet Background (UVB) produced by quasars and galaxies as given by Haardt & Madau (1996), with the heating rates multiplied by a factor 3.3 in order to better fit observational constraints on the temperature evolution of the Intergalactic Medium (IGM) at high redshift. Multiplying the heating rates by this factor (chosen empirically) results in a larger IGM temperature at the mean density which cannot be reached by the standard hydrodynamical code but aims at mimicking, at least in a phenomenological way, the non-equilibrium ionization effects around reionization (see for example Bolton et al. (2007)). The star formation criterion for one of the simulations (No Winds -NW) very simply converts all gas particles whose temperature falls below 10 5 K and whose density contrast is larger than 1000 into (collisionless) star particles, while for other two simulations with strong galactic winds (Strong Winds -SW and Extreme Strong Winds -ESW) a multiphase star formation criterion is used. The implementation of galactic winds is described in Springel & Hernquist (2003) but we summarize here the main features. Basically, the wind mass-loss rateṀW is assumed to be proportional to the star formation rate, and the wind carries a fixed fraction χ of the supernova (SN) energy. Gas particles are stochas- tically selected and become part of a blowing wind, then they are decoupled from the hydrodynamics for a given period of time or till they reach a given overdensity threshold (in units of ρ th which is the overdensity threshold for star formation) in order to effectively travel to less dense regions. Thus, four parameters fully specify the wind model: the wind efficiency η, the wind energy fraction χ, the wind free travel length lw and the wind free travel density factor δw.

The first two parameters determine the wind velocity vw through the following equations:Ṁ
w = ηṀ⋆,(1)
and
1 2Ṁ w v 2 w = χǫSNṀ⋆,(2)
from which one can compute the maximum allowed time of the decoupling t dec = lw/vw. The parameter lw has been introduced in order to prevent a gas particle from getting trapped into the potential well of the virialized halo and in order to effectively escape from the Inter Stellar Medium (ISM), reach the low density IGM and pollute it with metals. We used similar values to those that have been adopted by recent studies (e.g. Nagamine et. al. (2007)) that found that the outcome of the simulation is relatively insensitive to the choice of this parameter. We note that this wind implementation is different from the momentum-driven implementation of Oppenheimer & Davé (2006), which seems to better fit statistics of CIV absorption in the high-redshift universe. Throughout h indicates the Hubble constant at the present epoch, H0 in units of 100 km s −1 Mpc −1 . The cosmological model corresponds to a 'fiducial' ΛCDM Universe with Ωm = 0.26, ΩΛ = 0.74, Ω b = 0.0463, ns = 0.95, H0 = 72 km s −1 Mpc −1 and σ8 = 0.85 (the B2 series of Viel et al. (2004)). These parameters provide a good fit to the statistical properties of transmitted Lyα flux at z > 2. We use 2 × 400 3 dark matter and gas particles in a volume of size 60 h −1 Mpc box and the simulations are evolved down to z = 0. The gravitational softening is set to 5 h −1 kpc in comoving units for all the particles. The mass per gas particle is about 4.3 × 10 7 M⊙ which is a factor ∼ 5 better than that of Wilman et al. (2007).

These three simulations offer us the opportunity to investigate the galaxy-IGM interplay at z = 0 taking into account the role of different amount of feedback in the form of galactic winds and the role of two different criteria of star formation. Note that similar investigations using the same hydrodynamical code and focussing on the properties of neutral hydrogen around Damped Lyα systems have been performed by Nagamine et. al. (2007). In Figure 1 we present a qualitative view of the neutral hydrogen overdensity in a slice of thickness 6 comoving Mpc h −1 for the ESW run. We note a clear tendency for neutral hydrogen to avoid hot environments, where the neutral fraction is lower. The HI distribution in the NW and SW simulations it is almost identical on the scale of the plot, and therefore are not shown here. Differences can only be spotted on scales smaller than 0.5 comoving Mpc h −1 in which compact knots of neutral hydrogen are seen in the ESW that are not present in the NW simulation, since the simplified star formation criterion of this latter converts cold gas into collisionless stars. We will address the differences between the simulations in a quantitative way in the following sections.


Mock galaxies

In the simulation we assume a one-to-one correspondence between gas-rich galaxies and their dark matter halo hosts. We extract halos using a friend-of-friend algorithm with a linking length which is 0.2 times the mean interparticle separation and consider only identified haloes in the mass range [8 × 10 10 , 10 13.5 M⊙ h −1 ]. The lower limit is set (conservatively) by the numerical resolution while the upper limit avoids including large halos associated with groups and clusters, rather than single galaxies. However, we have checked that including the few halos larger than 10 13.5 M⊙ does not affect the results presented in this work. The geometric mean mass of the haloes is ∼ 2.46 × 10 11 M⊙ h −1 , to be compared with a mean mass 10 11 M⊙ h −1 associated to dark matter halos hosting HIPASS galaxies (RW06, Mo et al. (2005)). The space density of these mock galaxies (0.0023 per cubic Mpc h −1 comoving) is similar to that of HIPASS galaxies in the volume limited sample of Meyer et al. (2007) [M07] (∼ 0.003 per cubic Mpc h −1 ). This sample contains all galaxies within 30 Mpc h −1 and HI mass above 10 9.05 M⊙ h −2 , corresponding to a halo mass of ∼ 10 11 M⊙ h −1 , as inferred from the Mo et al. (2005) model, i.e. similar to our lower mass cut off. As we shall see in Section 4 the spatial twopoint correlation function of these mock galaxies matches that of the HIPASS objects, hence fulfilling the main requirement of our analysis.

The mock galaxies extracted from the three simulations are hosted in the same dark matter haloes that, however, have a different baryon (gas+star) content. The baryon mass in the mock galaxies is affected by galactic winds and star formation processes. The mean baryonic mass measured in the NW, SW and ESW simulations is respectively 4.7 , 2.1 and 1.9 × 10 10 M⊙ h −1 , thus indicating that galactic winds are quite effective in blowing baryons out of dark halos. The star formation mechanism also plays a role: the mean stellar mass of 3.0 × 10 10 M⊙ h −1 in the NW simulation decreases to 0.6 and 0.5 × 10 10 M⊙ h −1 in the SW and ESW experiments that adopt the multiphase criterion.

To better investigate the dependence of the spatial correlation on the galaxy mass we have divided, for the NW case only, the mock galaxy sample by mass in two subsets. The characteristics of all mock galaxy samples considered in this paper are summarized in Table 2.

Finally, to compute the correlation properties of the mock galaxies we have generated a random galaxy sample by randomly positioning 5 × 10 4 objects in the simulation volume. 


Mock Lyα absorbers

The computational box was pierced with 999 straight lines running parallel to the three Cartesian axes. Three sets of 333 mock Lyα absorption spectra along each axis were simulated and analyzed, both in real and redshift-space, to measure the position of each Lyα line and the column density of the associated HI absorber.

In this work we only consider weak Lyα absorbers with column densities in the range 12.41 log(NHI/cm −2 ) 14.81 to match the characteristics of the RW06 sample. The total number of absorbers increases slightly in presence of winds, while their average column density decreases, as shown in Table 3. However, the differences are small, especially between the SW and ESW experiments. The density of Lyα absorbers along the line-of-sight in the NW simulation (∼ 10 −3 km −1 s) is larger than in the RW06 sample (∼ 4 × 10 −4 km −1 s).

To investigate the significance of this mismatch we have computed the number of Lyα absorbers in our mock spectra, per unit redshift and column density in each of the three simulations and compared it with that measured by Penton et al. (2004) in the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) QSO spectra. The results are shown in fig. 2. The solid, red curve refers to the NW simulation. The short-dashed green and the dot-dashed blue curves represent the Lyα lines in the SW and ESW runs, respectively. The distribution of the absorbers is robust to the presence of galactic winds. When compared to the STIS data of Penton et al. (2004) (longdashed black curve) we note that the number of absorbers predicted by the simulation is larger than the observed ones over most of the NHI range sampled by RW06 (indicated by the two vertical dotted lines). The difference between models and data, however, is well within observational errors of ∼ 1 dex for log(NHI/cm −2 ) 14.5 (Penton et al. (2004)). Since we expect that similar observational errors for RW06 absorbers, we conclude that there is no significant difference in the number density of mock and RW06 Lyα lines.

To investigate the dependence of the clustering properties on the absorber column density we have set a column density threshold NHI = 10 13.24 cm −2 which divides the sample in two equally large subsets and sorted all mock absorbers in the NW simulation by column density.

The main characteristics of each mock absorber sample are listed in Table 3. Moreover, since these mock sample contains many more spectra than in the real case, we have also extracted several absorbers' sub-samples of 27 lines-of-sights to mimic the RW06 sample and assess the sampling noise.  Finally, to compute the two-point spatial correlation functions, we have generated random absorber samples by randomly positioning 50 Lyα absorption lines along the same 999 lines-ofsight used for the mock Lyα absorption spectra. We verified that the estimation of the correlation function does not change significantly if, instead, we consider 999 randomly chosen lines-of-sight for the random absorber samples. We note that 50 lines per spectra represents a good compromise between accuracy and computing time since doubling the number of random absorbers does not modify our estimates of ξ. 


CORRELATION ESTIMATORS

In this work we use the Davis & Peebles (1983) estimator to compute the galaxy-absorber cross-correlation function both in real and redshift-space, ξ(rp, π) as:
ξ(rp, π) = AG(rp, π) RG(rp, π) nRG nAG − 1,(3)
where AG(rp, π) is the number of mock absorber-galaxy pairs with projected separation, rp in the range [rp − δrp/2, rp + δrp/2], and separation along the line-of-sight, π, in the range [π − δπ/2, π + δπ/2]. RG(rp, π) is the number of pairs consisting of a random absorber and a mock galaxy. In both axes the binning δσ and δπ is set at 0.39 h −1 100 Mpc, i.e. 4 times wider than in RW06. The pair counts are divided by the total number of random-galaxy pairs nRG, and galaxy-absorber pairs, nAG. The separations rp and π between two objects are computed from their recession velocities vi and vj according to (Fisher et al. 1994):
π = l · s H0|l| , rp = s · s H 2 0 − π 2(4)
where l ≡ (v1 + v2)/2 and s ≡ v1 − v2. The estimator (3) is evaluated in the range of separations [0, 50] Mpc h −1 both along rp and π directions. To estimate the galaxy-absorber correlation function in redshift-space we have used the distant observer approximation, i.e. we have counted the galaxy-absorber pairs in each of the three subsets of mock spectra parallel to one Cartesian axis and considered only the corresponding component of the peculiar velocity to compute the redshift. The rationale behind this choice is to detect and average out possible geometrical distortions arising, for example, when lines-of-sights are oriented along HI-rich gas filaments or when a large fraction of mock galaxies belong to some prominent, anisotropic cosmic structure. The galaxy-galaxy and absorber-absorber auto-correlation functions are calculated in a similar way, i.e. by counting galaxygalaxy and absorber-absorber rather than galaxy-absorbers pairs. The spherical average of ξ(σ, π) gives the spatial correlation function ξ(s) where s = p r 2 p + π 2 . We also estimate the analogous quantity in real-space, ξ(r), where r represents the genuine pair separation that coincides wit their redshift difference in absence of peculiar velocities. In order to compare our result with those of RW06 we compute two more quantities. The first one is the projected correlation function, Ξ(rp):
Ξ(rp) = 2 Z πmax 0 ξ(rp, π)dπ,(5)
where πmax = 50 Mpc h −1 . The second one is the absorber auto-correlation along individual lines-of-sight,
ξ(π) = AA(π) AR(π) nAR nAA − 1,(6)
where AA(π) is the number of mock absorber pairs with separation π along the line-of-sight and AR(π) is the number of random absorber pairs. The uncertainties in the cross and auto-correlation functions of the mock samples are computed using the bootstrap resampling technique. For large, independent datasets bootstrap errors are equivalent to uncertainties calculated using the jackknife resampling, as in RW06. The uncertainty is computed in each (rp, π) bin as
σ 2 ξ i = P N j=1`ξ i − ξ j i´2 N − 1 ,(7)
where the subscript i identifies the bin, j refer the sample andξi is the average correlation function computed over the N bootstrapped samples. In this work N = 50 which provide us with a robust error estimate (increasing N to 350 modifies errors by < 2%). This error estimate assumes that the covariance matrix of the data is diagonal, i.e. that the values of ξ(σ, π) in different bins are not independent, which is known not to be the case. However, our simple way of estimating the uncertainties avoids the complication of dealing with a large covariance matrix, while providing an unbiased estimate of the real errors (Hawkins et al. 2003).


REAL-SPACE ANALYSIS

In this analysis we ignore peculiar velocities when we use Eq. 4 to estimate rp and π from redshifts. In Fig. 3 we show the realspace auto-correlation function of the mock galaxies in the GNW sample (black dots). Errorbars represent 1-σ bootstrap uncertainties. The autocorrelation of mock galaxies is shown together with that of HIPASS galaxies, indicated by the dashed line which represents the power-law best fit to the ξ(r) in the volume-limited sub-sample of galaxies extracted from the HIPASS catalog by M07. This power-law has a slope γgg = 1.5 ± 1 and correlation length r0,gg = 3.2 ± 1.4 Mpc h −1 . The two functions agree, within the errors, below 10 Mpc h −1 , since the power-law fit to the correlation function of our mock galaxies in the range [1, 10] Mpc h −1 has γgg = 1.46 ± 0.03 and r0,gg = 3.06 ± 0.15 Mpc h −1 . We have considered the M07 result since it is based on a sub-catalog that is volume limited, like our mock samples but it is worth noticing that the RW06 fit obtained using the full, flux limited HIPASS sample is fully consistent with the M07 result and, therefore, with our fit too.

The correlation signal of the mock galaxies suddenly drops at separations smaller than 0.4 Mpc h −1 . On the contrary, the galaxy correlation function of RW06 monotonically increases when reducing the pair separation. Including the few mock halos larger than 10 13.5 M⊙ sample does not modify significantly this smallscale trend. This small-scale mismatch as an artifact deriving from the fact that, in the simulation, we do not resolve galaxy-size sub-structures within the large cluster-size halos that, if present, would significantly contribute to the correlation signal at sub-Mpc h −1 scales. Indeed, when we run the Friends-of-Friends algorithm to identify halos using a smaller linking length of 0.1 times the mean inter-particle spacing, the small scale flattening disappears and the power-law behavior is restored below 0.3 Mpc h −1 . Mock absorbers are significantly less self-clustered than galaxies: their autocorrelation function (blue squares) is factor of ∼ 10 below that of galaxies (see Dobrzycki et al. (2002)). We cannot compare this result with observational data directly, since the observed Lyα absorbers are too sparse. However, RW06 was able to compute their correlation along each line-of-sight and we compare this result with the theoretical predictions in the next Section.

The red triangles show the mock galaxy-absorber crosscorrelation function of the ANW+GNW samples which is significantly weaker than the galaxy auto-correlation. This result is at variance with that of RW06 who find that the cross-correlation function of HIPASS galaxies and Lyα absorbers (dot-dashed curve in Figure 3) in the [1, 10] Mpc h −1 range is best fitted with a power-law slope γag = 1.9 ± 0.3 and correlation length r0,ag = 7.2 ± 1.4 Mpc h −1 , significantly larger than that of the galaxy auto-correlation function. When we fit the cross-correlation function of the mock data in the same range of separations we find RW06 pointed out that the cross-correlation signal increases with the column density of the absorber. We find the same trend in the simulation. We show in Fig. 4, the cross-correlation signal increases when we restrict our analysis to strong absorbers of the HA sample. On the contrary, massive mock galaxies do not seem to be significantly more or less correlated to Lyα absorbers than smaller galaxies. In fact, we find that the cross-correlation signal is almost independent of galaxy mass.

Strong galactic winds can blow gas out of galaxy-size halos and therefore could suppress the cross-correlation signal on sub-Mpc scales. To quantify the effect we have computed the galaxyabsorber correlation functions in the SW and ESW simulations and compared them with that of the NW experiment. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The red triangles with errorbars represent the same cross-correlation function of the ANW+GNW sample shown in Fig. 4 and refer to the case of no winds. The effect of including the effect of strong winds is illustrated by the blue dashed and solid black curves that refer to the SW and ESW simulations, respectively. Even adopting extreme prescriptions for galactic winds, the effect on the galaxy-absorber correlation function is very small and, as expected, is significant only at separations 0.3 Mpc h −1 where fewer galaxy-absorber pairs are found with respect to the NW case. This is not surprising, considering the free travel length lw adopted in the models. We find no significant differences between the SW and ESW experiments, which illustrates the robustness of the cross-correlation signal on scales larger than lw to the scheme adopted to simulate galactic winds. 


REDSHIFT-SPACE ANALYSIS

In Section 4 we have shown that hydrodynamical simulations do not reproduce the RW06 result. On the contrary, the galaxyabsorber correlation function is significantly weaker than the galaxy autocorrelation function. The previous analysis, however, has been performed in real-space ignoring peculiar velocities that may bias the correlation analysis. Moreover we have considered a number of spectra much larger than that of RW06. Therefore, we must account for the possibility is that the mismatch between hydrodynamical simulations and RW06 is not genuine but derives, instead, from redshift-space distortions and sparse HI sampling that, if not properly accounted for, may affect the cross-correlation analysis. In an attempt to account for both types of errors we repeat the correlation analysis using more realistic mock catalogs in which redshifts are used as distance indicators and only 27 lines-of-sight are taken to mimic the RW06 data set. To investigate the two effects separately, we first perform a redshift-space analysis of the whole ANW+GNW sample and then we consider sub-samples of 27 lines-of-sight. In Figure 6 the autocorrelation function of the mock galaxies in the GNW sample, ξgg(rp, π), is plotted on the (rp, π) plane. Contours are drawn at iso-correlation levels of 2,1,0.5,0.25. The distortions along the π axis induced by small scale incoherent motions within virialized structures (the so called fingers-of-god) can be seen at separations rp 2 Mpc h −1 extending out to π = 6 Mpc h −1 . A similar distortion pattern is seen in the correlation function of HIPASS galaxies (Fig. 2 of RW06). In that case a second, independent, distortion pattern along the rp axis, is detected at separations rp 4 Mpc h −1 . The compression of the isodensity contours along π is the signature of large scale coherent motions that increase the apparent number of pairs with large separations. This second distortion pattern is not visible in Fig. 6, a fact that we ascribe to the lack of large scale power in our simulations. Indeed, our simulations do not account for power on scales larger than 60 Mpc h −1 which could significantly contribute to the amplitude of the bulk motions and thus to the compression of the iso-density contours. Figure 7 shows the redshift-space cross-correlation function ξag(rp, π) of mock absorbers and galaxies in the ANW+GNW sample. The signal is significantly weaker than the galaxy autocorrelation and the distortion pattern looks very different as no significant elongation is seen along the π axis. Instead, at large separations, the iso-correlation contours are compressed along π, as expected in the presence of coherent motions. The differences between ξag(rp, π) and ξgg(rp, π) reveal that mock Lyα absorbers and galaxies have different dynamical properties. Galaxies' relative velocities are dominated by the incoherent motions, typical of virialized structures. Instead, the relative motion of mock Lyα absorbers and galaxies is more coherent, suggesting that mock absorbers are preferentially located in the outskirts of high density regions into which they are probably falling.

Finally, we note that the peak of the cross-correlation function is spatially offset from the center. This feature and the general distortion pattern of the simulated cross-correlation function are qualitatively similar to that of the cross-correlation function between the CHFT galaxies and the HST Quasar Absorption Line Key Project Data Release Lyα with 13 log(NHI/cm −2 ) < 15 measured by W07. On the contrary, the RW06 cross-correlation function is dominated by a very large finger-of-god distortion. A similar, but less prominent, distortion pattern has been seen by Davé et al. (1999) and W07 in their numerical experiments. RW06 interpreted this distortion as the draining of the gas from low-density regions into collapsed structure. Although the dynamical interpretation in this case is not as simple as in the galaxy-galaxy case, we note that the draining mechanism advocated by RW06 would probably lead to coherent, rather than incoherent motions, which would produce a very different distortion pattern. W07 suggested that the finger-of-god distortion could be a geometrical effect deriving from observing Lyα absorbers along lines-of-sights that run along some radially- To check this hypothesis we exploited the distant observer approximations and computed the cross-correlation function by considering redshift distortions along one Cartesian axis at a time. If distortions were purely geometric, i.e. induced by a few prominent, anisotropic structures, we would expect to see different distortion patterns in the cross-correlation functions computed along orthogonal axes. If, on the other hand, they were caused by random motions within large, spherically symmetric, virialized structures like galaxy clusters, we would expect to see fingers-ofgod type distortions along all axes. Instead, the correlation functions measured by three, orthogonally-positioned distant observers turned out to be very similar and consistent with the one shown in Fig. 7. We conclude that neither pure geometrical effects nor incoherent motions can alone explain the distortion pattern in the ξag(rp, π) of our mock ANW+GNW samples. Small redshift distortions could be amplified by sampling Lyα absorbers along a limited number of lines-of-sights, as in the RW06 case. To quantify the effect of shot noise errors coupled to dynamical and geometrically-induced distortions, we have constructed 30 independent realistic mock Lyα sub-samples of 27 independent lines-of-sights and computed their cross-correlation with all mock galaxies of the GNW sample. In Fig. 8 we show ξag(rp, π) computed in four such realistic mock samples. The cross-correlation functions shown in the two upper panels are characterized by prominent finger-of-god distortions which, in the upper-right plot, are similar in amplitude to that measured by RW06. This kind of distortion is found in ∼ 20% of the mock subsamples considered. The fact that we observe fingers-of-god distortions along different Cartesian axes suggest that they cannot be attributed to the fact that the sample is dominated by a single, prominent, anisotropic structure. Rather, they seem to originate from genuine, finger-of-god like, dynamical distortions which become apparent when a significant fraction of the 27 spectra samples some virialized regions. The relevance of sparse sampling variance in the cross-correlation analysis is even more evident in the two bottom panels of Fig. 8. They show the cross-correlation function computed along the same (Z−) axis, as in the top-right panel, but use two independent sets of lines-of-sight. Not only the fingerof-god distortion disappears but the cross-correlation signal is either very weak (bottom left) or significantly offset from the center (bottom-right). A more quantitative assessment of sparse sampling errors is given in Fig. 9 in which we show the projected absorber-galaxy cross correlation function Ξag(rp)/rp of the ANW+GNW sample (filled black dots). Small errorbars drawn with solid lines represent 1-σ bootstrap resampling errors computed using all 999 mock absorbers in the A catalog. Large errorbars plotted with dashed lines represent the scatter around the mean of the projected cross-correlation function computed using the 30 realistic mock absorbers' samples consisting of 27 lines-of-sight. The sampling noise clearly dominates the error budget and the total error significantly exceeds that of RW06. Filled red squares show the projected galaxy-galaxy correlation function with the 1-σ bootstrap errors. In order to assess the goodness of our error estimate we have compared the scatter among the 30 catalogs with the bootstrap errors computed from N=50 samples. The two errors agree well in the range (1,10) Mpc/h, in which boostrap errors are ∼ 15 % smaller than those shown in Fig. 9. On smaller scales the bootstrap resampling technique overestimates the errors by factor of ∼ 2. The autocorrelation signal is higher than the cross-correlation one, consistently with the real-space analysis. However, the difference is of the order of the errors, i.e. the mismatch is about 1-σ at separations rp > 1 Mpc h −1 , in the range in which RW06 find that the crosscorrelation signal is larger than the autocorrelation one. Filled triangles show the projected autocorrelation function of all absorbers in the ANW sample. As anticipated by the real-space analysis, absorbers correlate with themselves very weakly. When one accounts for sparse sampling their autocorrelation signal is consistent with zero.

RW06 were able to detect the auto-correlation signal of the absorbers by measuring their auto-correlation function ξ(π) of eq. 6 along individual lines-of-sight. We have repeated that analysis using all absorbers in the A sample. The resulting auto-correlation function replicates the RW06 result to within 1-σ.

Finally, to test the robustness of our results we have computed the cross-correlation function, ξag(rp, π) using the HG, LG, and LA sub-samples as well as the mock catalogs extracted from the SW and ESW runs. There are no cases in which wer are able to obtain a galaxy-galaxy autocorrelation signal weaker than the crosscorrelation one and to reproduce the large finger-of-god distortion feature observed by RW06.