II. EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL METHODS

Single crystals with a nominal composition of BaFe 2 S 1.5 Se 1.5 were grown by the Bridgman method 27,33 . A sample of single crystals weighing 2.55 g total were ground into powder for neutron scattering experiments. The NPD experiment was conducted on the HB-2A instrument at the High Flux Isotope Reactor, Oak Ridge National laboratory (HFIR, ORNL), using a monochromatic beam with a wavelength of λ = 2.4105Å. The powder diffraction patterns were refined by the Rietveld method using the FullProf Suite 35 . Neutron diffraction measurements on single crystals were carried out on the BT7 thermal triple axis spectrometer at the NCNR 36 . A closed cycle refrigerator was used to control the sample temperature. The INS experiment was carried out on the ARCS time-of-flight chopper spectrometer at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS), ORNL. The measurements were conducted at 5 K with incident beam energies of E i = 20 and 150 meV. The corresponding energy resolutions were ∆E = 1.0 and 7.0 meV, respectively, as determined by the full width at half maximum of the energy cuts at ∆E = 0 meV. The SpinW program was utilized to simulate INS spectra and compare with the experimen- tal results 37 . Magnetic susceptibility and resistivity measurements were performed using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). Energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (EVO, Zeiss) was employed to determine the composition of the crystals.

First-principles calculations were carried out with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP), based on density functional theory 38,39 . We used the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional with a spin-polarized generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The projector augmented-wave (PAW) 40 method with a 500 eV planewave cutoff was used, and a 6 × 4 × 4 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh allows the calculation to converge well. The spin-polarized GGA we used was combined with onsite Coulomb interactions, U , included for Fe 3d orbitals (GGA +U ) 41 . We employed U = 1 eV and J = 0.4 eV, which achieved values of the magnetic moments and band gap that are consistent with experiments. We started with the experimental atomic structure and then relaxed the crystal structure until the forces acting on each atom were less than 1 meV/Å. In order to simulate the S substitution of Se, we employed the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) 42 for the same atomic coordinates of Se and S atoms. The supercell we used is a monoclinic crystal cell with 32 Fe atoms, which can accommodate both the block and stripe AF orders. For the block AF order, the Fe1 and Fe2 spins share the same orientation, while the Fe3 and Fe4 spins are antiparallel to Fe1 and Fe2. For the stripe AF order, Fe1 and Fe4 spins share the same orientation, opposite to the Fe2 and Fe3 spins [see     Table I. The space group P nma agrees with previous reports. The structural refinement reveals the presence of ∼6% iron vacancies, corresponding to a refined composition of BaFe 1.89(2) S 1.5(1) Se 1.5 (1) . We note that the ratio of the S and Se atoms varies depending on the atomic site. The composition determined from EDS, normalized by the Ba content, is Ba 1.00(5) Fe 1.92(9) S 1.38(12) Se 1.37 (15) .

To gain more insight into the short range magnetic structure, we conducted neutron diffraction measurements on a single crystal sample. The data shown in Fig. 3 (a-d) reveal the appearance of broad mag- netic peaks centered at Q = (0.5, 1.0, 0.5) and Q = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5), corresponding to the stripe and block AF orders, respectively. Considering that these magnetic peaks were not observable in the powder samples, instead requiring a large single crystal and the high flux at BT7 for unambiguous observation, the magnetic order is expected to be weak and short-range. The domain size of the stripe AF order along the leg direction is determined to be ∼47Å by convoluting the instrumental resolution. The temperature-dependent resistivity shown in Fig. 3(e) exhibits insulating behavior, consistent with the other compositions in this system 27,32 . The temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility in Fig. 3(f) displays kinks at 39 and 116 K, indicating multiple magnetic transitions. However, the neutron diffraction intensity measured at Q = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) (corresponding to the block AF order) shows a broad transition beginning at 81 K. These results suggest that the transition temperature may depend on the resolution and sensitivity of the instrument, as in a short-range cluster spin glass system 43 .

To investigate the magnetic correlations present at low temperature, we conducted INS measurements on the same powder sample. Figures 4 (a) and (b) display the INS spectra with incident energies of E i = 20 and 150 meV, respectively. Intense gapless magnetic excitations can be observed at low Q in Fig. 4 (a). Representative constant energy cuts at E = 2, 4, 6 meV and constant Q cuts at Q = 4.75 and 5.75Å −1 are plotted in Fig.  4 (e) and (f). Two magnetic excitation modes centered at Q = 0.75 and 1.26Å −1 can be identified in Fig. 4 (e). The excitation mode at Q = 0.75Å −1 is ascribed to the block AF order at the wave vector of (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) 17 . The mode at Q = 1.26Å −1 is consistent with the stripe AF wave vector at (0.5, 1.0, 0.5), such as that observed in BaFe 2 S 3 26 . Thus, the spin excitations measured by INS demonstrate that both the block and stripe AF correlations exist in BaFe 1.89 S 1.5 Se 1.5 . The magnetic excitations at higher energies in Fig. 4 (b) and (f) show broad features, consistent with short-range magnetic correlations.

Using a classical Heisenberg model, we can describe the magnetic interactions in BaFe 1.89 S 1.5 Se 1.5 with the magnetic Hamiltonian
H spin = i<j J ij S i · S j ,(1)
where the sum runs over magnetic atoms in the compound and J ij are exchange integrals between Fe spins S i and S j . To describe correctly the magnetic configurations of this system, both intraladder and interladder interactions should be considered. Here, we include 12 nonequivalent exchange interactions with bond lengths less than 7Å, labeled J 1 through J 12 , which we illustrate in Fig. 1 (a)   We also find that SJ 2 = 11 meV and SJ ′ 2 = 6meV in Ref. 17, with a similar ratio between the corresponding J 4 and J 5 interactions found in our results. It is worth noting that BaFe 2−δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 is a compound with a different atomic structure and symmetry than BaFe 2 Se 3 . It would be difficult to compare Js between these two systems cleanly. However, given that the ground state of vacancy-free BaFe 2−δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 is the block magnetic phase observed in BaFe 2 Se 3 , it is reasonable to suppose that the exchange interactions in these two compounds could share some common features. To further check the completeness of our choice of Js, we performed calculations on another 60 RGC spin configurations. The fitted values for the 12 exchange integrals were then substituted into Eq. (1), and the energy, E Heisenberg , was calculated for each of the 60 RGC spin configurations. In Fig. 5(a), we compare E Heisenberg to the energies obtained from ab initio calculations, E ab initio , using the same 60 RGC spin configurations. Each black circle represents one of the RGC configurations, and they all lie very close to the line E Heisenberg = E abinitio shown in red. This close agreement demonstrates the completeness of our choice of exchange interactions in BaFe 1.89 S 1.5 Se 1.5 .

With the calculated magnetic exchange integrals, we can simulate the spin wave spectra in linear spin wave theory using the SpinW software package 37 . The six most prominent magnetic exchange interactions, SJ 1···6 , are included in the simulations of the powder-averaged magnetic spin excitation spectra of the block and stripe AF orders. The other calculated magnetic couplings are below 5 meV and would have negligible observable impact on the spin wave spectra. In Figs. 4 (c-f), we reproduce the spin wave spectra of BaFe 1.89 S 1.5 Se 1.5 by combining the block AF and stripe AF excitations with spectral weights of 80% and 20%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4 (e) and (f), the simulated results are in good agreement with the experimental data. The greater width of the observed spin excitations compared to the calculations results from the short-range magnetic order in the sample, as opposed to conventional long-range order. We note that theoretically one set of magnetic couplings would result in a degenerate magnetic ground state. Small deviations of the magnetic couplings could result in different magnetic orders. However, their effect on the magnetic excitation spectra may be negligible given a specific magnetic order.

To explore the effect of iron vacancies on the magnetic properties, we performed DFT calculations for BaFe 2−δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 in the paramagnetic (PM) phase, block AF phase, and stripe AF phase with varying amounts of iron vacancies. First, we must define an appropriate model for the PM phase. Here we employed the magnetic sampling method (MSM). Within the Heisenberg model, a PM phase can be modeled by averaging multiple spin configurations in such a way that individual exchange interactions cancel, i.e., ϕ = k S i (k) · S j (k) = 0, where k denotes the spin configuration. This MSM method has been reliably used to model the PM phase of ZnCr 2 O 4 46 and CaBaCo 4 O 7 47 . By considering the 12 inequivalent exchange interactions, the PM phase in BaFe 2−δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 can be modeled with four collinear spin configurations resulting in vanishing exchange integrals between the Fe spins. To validate this approach, we performed calculations on 100 RGC spin configurations, whose average energy is representative of the energy of the PM phase. In Fig. 5 (b), we plot the individual energies of the 100 RGC spin configurations (black dots) and their cumulative average (red curve) relative to the average energy of the four spin configurations selected for the PM model (green dashed line). The cumulative average energy of 100 RGC spin configurations converges to the energy from the four spin configurations representing the PM phase.

Having verified our model for the PM phase, we then calculated the total magnetic energy of BaFe 2−δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 in the block AF, stripe AF, and PM phases as a function of iron vacancy concentration. Our theoretical calcula- tions involve comparisons of energies alone. There is no entropy; that is, the calculations correspond to T = 0 even for the PM phase. Figure 6 (a) shows the results calculated using the experimentally refined parameters in Table I without geometry and atomic position optimization. The total energy of the PM phase is always well above the other two phases and thus can be ruled out as the ground state. The block AF phase is more stable than the stripe AF phase when the Fe vacancy concentration is less than 12%, above which the trend reverses. The introduction of Fe vacancies may affect the atomic configurations, so we also performed equivalent calculations with geometry and atomic position optimization, with the corresponding results shown in Fig. 6 (b). In this case, the crossing point between the block AF and stripe AF is shifted to ∼6%, which is very close to the vacancy concentration in the present sample. Although it is not possible for us to fine tune the concentration of Fe vacancies in the DFT calculations due to the limitations of the supercell size and computational power, the calculated results clearly show that the competition between these two phases can be tuned by iron vacancies. Within a certain range of the vacancy concentrations around 6%, the competition of these two phases may become so strong that the long range order is de-stroyed, consistent with the sample used in the present study. Microscopically, the disappearance of long-range magnetic order might also be caused by the dilution of exchange interactions due to the introduction of Fe vacancies, similar to the percolation effect in diluted magnetic semiconductors. However, such an effect typically requires a vacancy concentration well above 10%. This dilution effect may explain the absence of the block AF order in severely iron deficient BaFe 1.8 Se 3 34 . For a realistic sample, one would not expect the composition exactly locates at the magic concentration where the energies of the two magnetic orders are equal. As the temperature is lowered, the regions with different Fe-vacancy contractions and therefore different preferred phases (block or stripe) would freeze out so that they are simply not able to come to equilibrium with each other. Further, as the clusters freeze they will tend to exert random magnetic fields on each other thus enhancing the spin disorder and causing the time to equilibrate to diverge exponentially with decreasing temperature, forming a novel spin glass state with two short range orders. In other words, the disorder is ultimately a kinetic phenomenon with the system unable to find its true ground state whether it is stripe or block.