MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell Culture, Transient Transfection, and Luciferase Assays-AGS gastric adenocarcinoma cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 g/ml streptomycin (all from Invitrogen) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere (5% CO 2 ).

On the day before transfection, 1 ϫ 10 5 cells were seeded into 12-well plates. 0.3 g of reporter construct and 0.3 g of each expression construct were transfected using Superfect transfection reagent (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to manufacturer's instructions. 0.005 g of the promoter TK-Renilla luciferase construct was transfected as internal control. The total DNA amount was kept at 1.5 g/well. Corresponding empty vectors were used to make up the difference between treatments. Luciferase activity was measured 48 h later using a Monolight TM 3010 Luminometer (PharMingen, San Diego, CA). The dual luciferase assay kit was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). All experiments were done by triplicates and performed at least three independent times. All results were shown as relative luciferase activity and represented the mean Ϯ S.E. For TGF-␤ treatment, cells were starved in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium without fetal bovine serum for 24 h and then cultured for another 24 h after the addition of 3 ng/ml TGF-␤1 (Sigma).

Plasmids-The promoter luciferase reporter constructs of murine gastrin were generated by PCR (see Table I for primer sequences) and digested with SmaI and BamHI and then ligated into pXP2 (26) predigested with the same enzymes. The mutation of putative LEF/TCF or  (26). The integrity of all constructs was verified by DNA sequencing. Cytomegalovirus early promoter-driven 5Ј FLAG-tagged human Smad3 and Smad4 mammalian expression vectors, pCF-S3 and pCD-D43F(R), were gifts from Dr. Shioda (27,28). Constitutively active human ␤-catenin (S37A) and wild type human TCF4 expression vectors were from Upstate Biotechnology, Inc. (Lake Placid, NY). The reporter construct p3TP-luc (29) and mammalian expression vectors for p300 (30) and E1A (31) have been described previously.

Coimmunoprecipitation and Western Blotting-AGS cells were cotransfected with FLAG-tagged Smad3 or Smad4 or both along with ␤-catenin and TCF4 expression constructs. Cells were harvested 48 h later and lysed in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40 (Nonidet P-40), 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). 2000 g of proteins from each preparation was incubated with 0.5 g of appropriate immunoprecipitation antibody in 500 l of immunoprecipitation buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1ϫ proteinase inhibitor mixture) for 1 h at 4°C with gentle rotation. Incubation was continued overnight after the addition of 30 l of protein-A Sepharose flurry (Amersham Biosciences). Protein A-precipitated protein complexes were recovered by brief centrifugation and washed five times with immunoprecipitation buffer and then disassociated by adding 40 l of 2ϫ SDS sample buffer and boiling for 5 min. The proteins were detected by Western blot using the indicated antibodies. Anti-␤-catenin and anti-FLAG antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (Beverly, MA). Anti-Smad2/3 and anti-TCF4 antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA).

Preparation of Nuclear Extract and Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA)-Nuclear extracts from TGF-␤1 or vehicle-treated AGS cells were prepared as previously described (32,33). For EMSA, 32 Plabeled double-stranded DNA oligomers corresponding to the murine gastrin SBE2 (5Ј-TGG GGA GTC TGG CCT CAC CTG GAA) and the TCF binding site (5Ј-TTC CAG GCC CAT TTC TCT TGC TGT GGG) were incubated with 6 g of nuclear extracts on ice for 20 min. For competition assays, 100ϫ cold wild type or mutant oligonucleotides (mutant SBE2: 5Ј-TGG GGA tTC TGt CCT CAC CTG GAA; mutant TCF site: 5Ј-TTC CAG GCC taa TTC TCT TGC TGT GGG, with mutated nucleotides in lowercase) were mixed with 32 P-labeled probes and then incubated with nuclear extracts from TGF-␤1-treated AGS cells. For supershift assays, the antibody against Smad3, Smad4, ␤-catenin, or TCF4 or control antibody against cyclin D1 was added to the mixture individually and incubated on ice for 30 min before resolving in 8% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel.

DNA Affinity Precipitation Assays (DAPA)-DNA Affinity Precipitation Assays were performed essentially as previously described (34,35). Briefly, 5Ј-biotin end-labeled sense and antisense oligonucleotides corresponding to the wild type or mutant Smad-or TCF/LEF-binding site (see above) of murine gastrin promoter were custom synthesized by Invitrogen. The oligomers were annealed and purified as previously described (35). 50 g of nuclear extracts from TGF-␤1-treated AGS cells were incubated with 0.25 g of wild type or mutant oligonucleotide probe in 400 l of binding buffer (60 mM KCl, 12 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 4 mM Tris-HCl, 5% glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol) on ice for 1 h. The DNA-protein complexes were then incubated overnight at 4°C with gentle rotation with 40 l of Tetralink TM Avidin Resin (Promega, Madison, WI), which was washed and then pre-equilibrated with binding buffer for 1 h. Avidin-precipitated DNA-protein complexes were washed five times with binding buffer and then disassociated by adding 40 l of 2ϫ SDS sample buffer and boiling for 5 min. The proteins were resolved on polyacrylamide gel and followed by immunoblotting using specified antibodies.

Small Interference RNA (siRNA) and Real Time PCR-Doublestranded RNA oligonucleotides for RNA interference of control (enhanced green fluorescence protein), Smad3, and TCF4 were custom-synthesized by Qiagen (Valencia, CA) and transfected into AGS cells using Oligofectamine (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Total RNA was extracted from transfected cells by the Trizol method, and cDNA was synthesized using the Superscript first-strand reverse transcriptase-PCR kit (Invitrogen). mRNA levels of gastrin and the RNAi targeting genes were quantified by real time PCR using the SYBR Green kit (Qiagen) and the ⌬⌬ TM method. The oligonucleotide sequences for real time PCR are as follows: human gastrin, 5Ј-GCG CTG GCC GCC TTC TCT GA (sense) and 5Ј-CAT CCA TAG GCT TCT TCT TCT TCC (antisense); GAPDH, 5Ј-GAC ATC AAG AAG GTG GTG AAG C (sense) and 5Ј-GTC CAC CAC CCT GTT GCT GTA G (antisense); Smad3, 5Ј-GGC CAC CGT CTG CAA CAT C (sense) and 5Ј-TAC TGG TCA CAG TCT GTC (antisense); TCF4, 5Ј-TGA AGG CAG CTG CCT CAG C (sense) and 5Ј-GTG GGT GGC CTC AGC GAG C (antisense).