METHODS

The trial of MDA for scabies and impetigo has been described elsewhere [7]. Briefly, selected communities in Malaita province in the Solomon Islands were randomized to MDA with open-label ivermectin or ivermectin plus azithromycin. All residents of these communities were eligible to participate. In both trial arms, all participants were examined for scabies and offered a single oral dose of ivermectin (200 μg/kg body weight). Persons with a contraindication to ivermectin (pregnancy, breastfeeding, or weight <15 kg) were offered topical permethrin instead. Those in whom a clinical diagnosis of scabies was made at baseline were given a second dose of ivermectin 7-14 days later. Written informed consent was obtained from adults and from a parent or guardian of each child aged under 18 years. Assent was also obtained from children who were able to provide it. The study was approved by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine Ethics Committee, the Solomon Islands National Health Ethics Committee, and the Atoifi Adventist Hospital Ethics Committee. The main trial was prospectively registered on clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02775617). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) staff did not interact with study participants or have access to identifying information.

For the substudy reported here, we collected DBSs from all children aged less than 13 years at the baseline and 12-month surveys. We used a fluorescent bead-based assay to test for antibodies against the recombinant NIE antigen [6]. Briefly, serum was incubated with microspheres conjugated to NIE, beads were washed to remove unbound immunoglobulin (Ig), and then bound anti-NIE antibody was detected using biotinylated anti-human IgG + IgG4 antibody followed by streptavidin-phycoerythrin. Plates were run on a Luminex-200 (Austin, TX) and results reported as median fluorescence intensity with background subtracted (MFI-BG). We used a receiver operating characteristic curve analysis to determine cutoffs for seropositivity.

We conducted a before-and-after analysis to determine the effect of the MDA on the prevalence of antibodies to S. stercoralis. Azithromycin has no known activity against S. stercoralis so we combined the 2 trial arms into a single group for analysis. We calculated the seroprevalence of S. stercoralis at baseline and at 12 months and the absolute and relative reduction at 12 months. Statistical analysis was conducted in R 3.4.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).