Methods


In vitro oocyte maturation and fertilization

In vitro embryo production was carried out as described in Stoecklein et al. (2021). A total of four replicates were performed. Each replicate consisted of a group of ~500 Holstein oocytes purchased from J.R. Simplot (Boise, ID, USA) that were shipped overnight in tubes containing oocyte maturation medium covered with mineral oil in a portable incubator at 38.5˚C. A total of 50 cumulus complex oocytes were placed in each tube. After maturation for 22 h, oocytes were rinsed with HEPES-TALP (Tyrode's Albumin-Lactate-Pyruvate) medium and placed in groups of up to 250 in a dish containing 1.7 mL of in vitro fertilization (IVF)-TALP and fertilized in vitro with non-sorted semen from two Holstein bulls. Bulls were chosen because their spermatozoa had been shown to work well for in vitro fertilization. For each replicate, half of the oocytes were fertilized with one bull and half with the other bull. Gametes were co-incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5% (v/v) CO 2 for 18-20 h. After fertilization, putative zygotes were washed with HEPES-TALP medium and placed in a tube containing 200 μL HEPES-TALP medium to perform removal of cumulus cells from zygotes by agitation for 5 min using a vortex mixer.


CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene targeting of CSF2RA and embryo culture

Putative zygotes (i.e. oocytes exposed to sperm) were subjected to CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene targeting for CSF2RA, as previously described by Xiao et al. (2021). The CRISPR/Cas9 system was designed to introduce mutations in exon 5 and intron 5 of CSF2RA on BTA3 or induce the deletion of the exon 5 and intron 5. A total of 844 zygotes were injected with 40 ng/μL of each sgRNA for CSF2RA and 75 ng/μL Cas9 mRNA (knockout; KO), while another 831 zygotes (wildtype controls) were injected with 75 ng/μL Cas9 mRNA only (wildtype), respectively. Eight knockout blastocysts produced in vitro were genotyped to ensure the effectiveness of the CRISPR/Cas9 system. None of the embryos carried a wildtype allele, confirming the effectiveness of the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Specifically, embryos were either biallelically edited with an exon 5 deletion (n = 2), biallelically edited (n = 1) or edited in both alleles but where the alleles exhibited mosaicism (n = 5).

Modifications introduced by the CRISPR/Cas9 system led to the formation of a premature stop codon, thereby inactivating the gene. The frequency and types of edits were consistent with our previous study using the identical CRISPR/Cas9 system (Xiao et al. 2021). Following microinjection, embryos were washed in HEPES-TALP medium, and up to 50 putative zygotes were placed in a four-well dish containing 500 μL synthetic oviduct fluid bovine embryo 2 ) covered with 300 μL mineral oil in an incubator at 38.5˚C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% (v/v) CO 2 , 5% O 2 , and the balance N 2 at 38.5°C. Embryos were cultured until day 5 after insemination when cleavage was evaluated, and embryos greater than 16 cells in number were selected for embryo transfer.


Embryo transfer and recovery

All procedures were approved by the University of Missouri Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Embryo transfers were performed in three replicates, with 7-8 Holstein heifers at the University of Missouri Beef Research and Teaching Farm per replicate. Heifers were examined by transrectal ultrasound to ensure cyclicity. For each replicate, one to two heifers received knockout embryos from bull 1, one to two received knockout embryos from bull 2, one to two received control embryos from bull 1, and one to two received control embryos from bull 2. Two heifers were used as recipients in two replicates (treatment was alternated between replicates), whereas the other heifers were used once only.

Ovulation for the heifers of each replicate was synchronized hormonally using a 7-day CO-Synch + CIDR protocol (Stevenson et al. 2008). Briefly, heifers received an intravaginal progesterone-releasing device (1.38 g CIDR®; Zoetis, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) and 100 µg, i.m., of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH; Fertagyl®, Merck) on the morning of day 0. On the morning of day 7, CIDRs were removed, heifers received 25 mg of prostaglandin F2α (Lutalyse®, Zoetis), and an estrus detection aid (Estrotech®, Hermitage, TN, USA) was placed on the tail head of each heifer. A second injection of prostaglandin F2α was given on the morning of day 8. Starting on day 9, ovaries were scanned by ultrasound twice daily to monitor ovulation. Only heifers that ovulated were eligible to receive embryos. A second injection of GnRH was given on the morning of day 10 (anticipated day of ovulation and considered equivalent to day 0 of embryonic development).


4:2 e230001

Embryo transfer was performed on day 15 (i.e. day 5 after anticipated ovulation). Embryos >16 cells were selected from embryo cultures and transferred in groups ranging in number from 7 to 24 into each heifer. The number transferred depended on the number of available embryos in each replicate. Embryos were placed in the uterine horn ipsilateral to the corpus luteum using an embryo transfer pipette and a transcervical approach. A total of 107 knockout embryos (62 from bull 1 and 45 from bull 2) were transferred into 10 recipient heifers and 171 control embryos (82 from bull 1 and 89 from bull 2) were transferred into 12 recipient heifers.

Embryos were recovered non-surgically at day 7 of development (day 17 of the synchronized estrous cycle). Briefly, a 58.4 cm, 30 cc silicone Foley catheter (Agtech, Manhattan, KS, USA) was inserted into the body of the uterus and secured by inflating the cuff of the catheter with 10-15 cc of air. Uterine horns were filled with complete flush medium (Biolife TM Advantage, Agtech) and emptied into a 75 µm mesh collection filter (WTA, São Paulo, Brazil) by massaging the uterus multiple times using the shallow method of collection and recollection (Sartori et al. 2003). Approximately 2 L of flush medium was used for each heifer. The number, stage, and grade of recovered embryos were recorded according to the International Embryo Technology Society manual (Stringfellow & Givens 2010). Individual morulae and blastocysts were incubated in 1% (w/v) proteinase from Streptomyces griseus in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline for 30 s to remove the zona pellucida, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until analysis of gene expression by RNA-Seq.


Statistical analysis of embryonic development data

Data were analyzed by logistic regression using the GLIMMIX procedure of SAS version 9.4 (Cary, NC, USA). Development (yes/no) was modeled as a binomial variable. Data for in vitro development were analyzed with a model that included effects of treatment, sire, and the interaction and with replicate as a random effect. Sire and the interaction were not significant, and hence the data were re-analyzed after removal of these terms. Data for development in utero were analyzed with a model that included effects of treatment, sire, and replicate and with cow nested within replicate and treatment as a random effect. Sire and replicate were not significant so the data were re-analyzed after the removal of these terms. As an additional test of the hypothesis, a two-tailed chi-square test was used to determine whether the proportion of recovered embryos that were blastocysts was affected by treatment.


RNA isolation and sequencing

RNA from individual embryos was isolated using the PicoPure® Kit (ThermoFisher) following the manufacturer's instructions with the exception that Nano spin columns (Luna Nanotech, Toronto, Ontario, CA, USA) were used instead of the mini columns provided with the kit. High-throughput sequencing was performed at the University of Missouri Genomics Technology Core. The number of morulae analyzed was four control (three males and one female) and four knockout embryos (one male and three females). The number of blastocysts was 17 control (eight males and nine females) and 9 knockout embryos (two males and seven females). Libraries were constructed following the manufacturer's protocol with reagents supplied in the Takara SMART-Seq v4 Ultra Lowinput RNA Kit (Takara Bio). Sample concentration was determined by Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen) using the Qubit HS RNA assay kit, and RNA integrity was checked using the Fragment Analyzer automated electrophoresis system. Briefly, the poly-A containing mRNA was purified from total RNA, tRNA was fragmented, double-stranded cDNA was generated from fragmented RNA, and the index containing adapters were ligated to the ends. The amplified cDNA constructs were purified by the addition of Axyprep Mag PCR Clean-up beads (Corning). The final construct of each purified library was evaluated using the Fragment Analyzer automated electrophoresis system, quantified with the Qubit fluorometer using the Qubit HS dsDNA assay kit, and diluted according to Illumina's standard sequencing protocol for sequencing on the NovaSeq 6000.


Analysis of RNA-sequencing data

The quality of fastq files of sequence data was checked with a FastQC tool (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham. ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). Adapter trimming was performed using the cutadpat tool (Martin 2011). Trim Galore (https:// www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_ galore/) was used to perform quality trimming (Phred score >30) by sliding window scan and selection of read lengths of 30 nucleotides or longer. Reads were then mapped to the bovine reference genome ARS-UCD1.2 (Rosen et al. 2020) using the program STAR (Dobin et al. 2013). Quantification of reads was performed with FeatureCounts (Liao et al. 2014 supplementary materials given at the end of this article). The number of net mapped reads per sample averaged 5.67 million (range: 0.96-10.70 million reads). The sex of each embryo was determined by quantifying the number of reads mapped to the Y chromosome. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between groups were determined by edgeR-robust (Zhou et al. 2014) while controlling for embryo sex. Genes were considered as differentially expressed if the false discovery rate (FDR) was <0.05. Data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus of the National Center for Biotechnology Information and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE222003.


Functional analysis of gene expression

Functional annotation of DEG was performed using the DAVID Bioinformatics Database (https://david.ncifcrf. gov/). Functional annotations with FDR < 0.05 were considered significant. In addition, DEGs were evaluated for overrepresentation of molecular and cellular functions as classified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Qiagen) using FDR < 0.05 as a cutoff.

Gene set enrichment analysis of all genes was performed using a program called pathway analysis with down-weighting of overlapping genes (PADOG) whereby genes that frequently occur in multiple gene sets are weighed less than genes that appear in few gene sets (Tarca et al. 2012). Gene expression data from each individual embryo were used in the analysis. In cases of duplicate genes, the gene with the greatest expression was retained in the data set. The analysis was performed on the http:// reactome.org website as described by Griss et al. (2020). The analysis was performed to examine the effect of treatment (knockout vs control) while holding embryo sex constant. Gene sets with FDR < 0.05 were considered significant.