Materials and Methods

Protein extraction. Samplewas first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 ml centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT, and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 2 h at −20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was re-dissolved in buffer Annotation and functional enrichment analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. Identified proteins domain functional descriptions were annotated by InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used to identify enriched pathways. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. A two-tailed Fisher's exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the identified acetylated protein against all database proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard FDR methods. The GO, domains, and pathways with a corrected p-value < 0.05 are considered significant. WoLFPSORT (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html) was used to predict subcellular localization.


Motif analysis.

Motif analysis was performed with softwaremotif-x 53 by analyzing the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modifier-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. All of the protein sequences were used as background database parameter, and other parameters with default.



The peptides were then combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Enrichment. To enrich acetylated lysine (Kac) peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mMNaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mMTris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH 2 O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.LC-MS/MS Analysis.Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile) for 24 min, 23% to 35% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 280 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive TM Plus hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Search. The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Magnaporthe oryzae (14,835 sequences) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 3 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lysine and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as >0.75.
(8 M urea, 100 mM NH 4 CO 3 , pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 

Trypsin digestion. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and 

alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH 4 CO 3 to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 

HPLC Fractionation. The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using 

Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated 
with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. 