Methods

The study was conducted in the states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh in India. Uttar Pradesh is the most populous state in India with 199.8 million people (17% of national population) and Bihar is the third most populous state with a population of 104.1 million. 13 The majority reside in rural areas (89% in Bihar and 78% in Uttar Pradesh). 13 The per capita income is well below the national average making them the poorest among all the states and union territories in India. 14 Furthermore, both states are part of the Northern India, one of the two geographic areas where child marriage rates are persistently high. 5 According to the National Family Health Survey-5 (a survey focused on maternal and child health outcomes among a nationally representative sample of girls in India) conducted in 2019-2020, 40.3%


Research in context

Evidence before this study A nationally representative mortality survey in India found suicide rates in 15-to 29-year-old females twice as high as in high-income countries. Early marriage, reflecting underlying gender norms, might contribute to both mental health problems and high suicide rates. We searched PubMed and google scholar reports to understand the mental health effects of marriage in females during adolescence using the search terms "marriage", "early marriage", "females", "girls", "child", "mental health", "depression", "death", "cause of death", "mortality", "self-harm", "suicide", "India" on May 30, 2021, without language or publication date restrictions. There were associations reported between early marriage depression, suicide and self-harm but no previous longitudinal studies.


Added value of this study

This study provides a comprehensive assessment of the association between poor mental health and early marriage in females in India in representative adolescent samples from two states. It confirms poor mental health as a risk factor for early marriage. Additionally, the study confirms that early marriage heightens risks for depression and suicidality. It furthermore establishes abuse within marriage as an additional risk factor for mental health problems and suicide risks in girls.


Implications of all the available evidence

The study illustrates the importance of integrating mental health perspectives into programming targeting child marriage. Equally, a narrow focus on mental health and suicide prevention, without taking into consideration the broader context of early marriage and inequitable gender norms, seems unlikely to be successful in shifting the mental health profile of girls and young women.

Articles of women aged 18-29 years were married before age 18 in Bihar and 18.8% in Uttar Pradesh. 15


Study participants and data collection

UDAYA is a longitudinal representative study of 10 to 19-year-old adolescents in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. 11,12 The baseline survey (wave 1) was conducted in 2015-2016, and the follow-up survey (wave 2) was conducted in 2018-2019. In this paper, we used data of unmarried adolescent females at wave 1 and for whom data from both waves were available, but as described below both unmarried and married females as well as males were recruited into the UDAYA study.

The study used a systematic, multi-stage stratified design to draw independent sampling areas for rural and urban areas. A total of 150 primary sampling units (PSUs) (villages in rural areas and census wards in urban areas) were selected in each state using the 2011 census list. The selected PSUs were mapped, and a household list was prepared. Each PSU was then divided into two nearly equal segments, from which one segment was randomly chosen for conducting interviews with females and the other segment used for interviews with males (married females were interviewed in both segments to meet the sample size requirement of the original UDAYA study). Systematic sampling was used to select households in each segment for interviews, which were conducted in three categories: younger females (10-14 years), unmarried older females (15-19 years), and married older females (15-19 years) in the female segment, and younger males (10-14 years), older males (15-19 years), and married older males (15-19 years) in the male segment. A maximum of three interviews with no more than one respondent per category were conducted in each selected household. If there were more than one respondent in a single category, Kish table was used to randomly select a respondent. The respondent thus selected was not allowed to be replaced. The response rate in wave 1 was 92% and 20,594 adolescents (14,625 females, 9732 unmarried females) were interviewed using an age-appropriate structured questionnaire in Hindi.

At the time of wave 2 data collection (2018-19), 6% of female participants had immigrated and could not be tracked and another 6% refused to participate. The remaining 12,251 female participants were reinterviewed, but 3% gave inconsistent responses related to age and education, and were, thus, excluded. The effective follow-up rate for females was 81% (n = 11,864).

Our study sample comprised unmarried adolescent females at wave 1 and for whom data from both waves was available (n = 7864, including n = 257 females who were married without "gauna" at wave 1). "Gauna" is a term used locally for a ceremony that indicates the start of marital life and the consummation of the marriage. If the girl is married but "gauna" has not occurred, the girl continues to stay with her parents. The dataset available for download includes computed survey weights for the entire sample and each state (used in the current report).

Interviews of boys and girls were undertaken in separate segments of each PSU to maintain privacy. Names were not recorded in the computer form in which data were collected. Interviewers conducted interviews in locations that offered privacy for the interview, skipped to relatively non-sensitive sections in case the interview was observed by parents or other family members, called upon a fellow interviewer to engage the bystander, and terminated interviews if privacy could not be ensured.

Every team had one field editor responsible for backchecks and quality control of interviews and one supervisor responsible for the overall management of fieldwork, team-related logistics and for assisting in field editing and back-checking. A field coordinator oversaw fieldwork, ensured correct survey procedures were followed and data quality was maintained. Each team filled quality control sheets to provide information on response rates in each PSU. Population Council of India staff monitored and supervised data collection operations during field visits. Additionally, the staff generated field quality tables from the data received from the teams on a regular basis. More details about the interviews, interviewers' selection and training can be found in the earlier published reports. 11,12 Measures At wave 1 and 2 interviews, information was collected about respondent's education, their literacy and numeracy levels, work, growing up experiences (related to physical health, exposure to various programmes, migration etc.), agency (e.g. aspirations), exposure to mass and social media, awareness of sexual and reproductive health matters, awareness of government programmes, sexual activity, marriage (a single question with seven options related to marital status with two follow-up questions about marriage date and number of times married), health including nutritional status and mental health, family life and sex education, civic participation, and experience and perpetration of violence. For girls who got married by wave 2, data on marriage including the relationship with husband, abuse, and pregnancy was also collected during the wave 2 interview. Interview questionnaires used for wave 1 and 2 can be accessed from www.projectudaya.in. For participants who had migrated between wave 1 and 2 and could be tracked (n = 95), wave 2 data collection was conducted using telephone interviews. Sensitive data regarding sexual experiences and violence was not gathered over telephonic interviews for privacy and safety purposes.

Population Council of India staff conducted the training of interviewers, while external experts from Sangath (NGO working in mental health) trained interviewers in administering the mental health section of the questionnaire. Overall, 100 young men and women underwent interviewer training, and 35 young men underwent training for household mapping and listing exercises. On the basis of the performance, 80 young men and women were recruited as field investigators and 30 young men were recruited for the household mapping and listing exercise. Interviewers underwent extensive training in ethical issues. Interviewers for the interviews were divided into 10 teams. Each team consisted of three male and five female investigators. Female investigators conducted interviews for girls and male investigators conducted interviews for boys.

The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) was used to collect data on depressive symptoms at both waves (Hindi version). 16 The PHQ-9 is a standard depression screening instrument used globally, and has been validated in Indian settings. 17 It covers questions about a range of depressive symptoms including feeling hopeless, trouble with sleep, lack of energy or pleasure in activities and concentration over the past 15 days or 2week period. The responses are recorded as "not at all", "less than one week", "one week or more" and "nearly every day", coded from 0 to 3, and are used to create a summary depressive symptoms score ranging from 0 to 27. For the purpose of this paper, we used scores of ≥9 as the cut-off value for moderate to severe depressive symptoms (hereafter depressive symptoms) as in a validation study for PHQ-9 in Indian adolescents, score of 9 showed a better sensitivity as compared to a score of 10 for ICD-10 diagnosis of depression. 17 At both waves, suicidal ideation was measured using a single question put to adolescents older than 13 years of age, "during the past one year, did you ever seriously consider attempting suicide?". Response categories included "yes", "no" and "I don't want to answer". 18 The latter category was treated as missing in the present study. Those participants who responded "yes" to contemplating suicide were then asked, "during the past one year, how many times did you actually attempt suicide". One attempt or more was considered as any suicide attempt being present.

In wave 2 interview, girls who entered marriage between waves 1 and 2 were asked about different forms of abuse from their husband. There were seven questions related to physical abuse (example: has your husband slapped you, dragged or beaten you up); one question related to sexual abuse (has your husband ever forced sex); and one related to emotional abuse (does your husband humiliate you in front of others). A single binary abuse variable was created, coded as 1 if having answered 'yes' to any abuse item, or 0 if answered 'no' to all abuse items. Childbirth was recorded based on response to a single question about pregnancy and its outcome (have you ever been pregnant, if yes, how old you were when you became pregnant and what was the outcome of pregnancy), coded as 1 if reporting to have had childbirth and 0 if not.


Statistical analysis

Baseline characteristics collected at wave 1, and mental health at wave 1 and 2 were described for girls who remained unmarried between the two waves, and those who married, using number and percentage for categorical variables and mean (standard deviation (SD)), or median (interquartile range (IQR)) for continuous variables. Baseline characteristics were also described for 9732 girls, unmarried at wave 1, in the complete UDAYA study sample and 7864 girls with information available at both waves.


Objective 1: Transition to marriage by history of mental health problems

We estimated the association between mental health problems at wave 1 (depressive symptoms, seriously contemplated suicide at least once, and attempted suicide at least once) as the predictor and odds of transitioning to marriage by wave 2, using logistic regression models with computed survey weights applied. Models were adjusted for age at wave 1. From these models, we also estimated the proportions (and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs)) of unmarried and newly married girls who at wave 1 had history of mental health problems.

Objective 2: Association between transitioning to marriage and mental health outcomes Logistic regression models with survey weights applied were used to estimate the odds ratios (OR) and 95% CIs for the association between entering marriage and mental health outcomes (wave 2 depressive symptoms, contemplating suicide at least once, or attempting suicide at least once). Models were adjusted for baseline confounders identified a priori, which were state, caste, age at wave 1, household income quintile at wave 1, and level of education at wave 1. Model for wave 2 depressive symptoms as the outcome was additionally adjusted for wave 1 PHQ total score, while models for contemplating suicide at least once and attempting suicide at least once were respectively adjusted for contemplating suicide at least once and attempting suicide at least once at wave 1.


Objective 3: Association between childbirth and abuse within marriage and depressive symptoms

For newly married girls, proportions of those with childbirth or experience of any abuse and age at marriage (median, interquartile range, mean and standard deviation) were reported overall and by depressive symptoms at wave 2. Then, for these participants, the odds ratios (and 95% CIs) for the association between Articles childbirth, any abuse, and age at marriage and depressive symptoms at wave 2 were estimated using logistic regression models, adjusted for baseline confounders (state, caste, wave 1 PHQ total score, household income quintile at wave 1, and level of education at wave 1, and age at marriage for abuse and childbirth) and survey weights applied. We also report results from an additional analysis that included both abuse and childbirth variables and an interaction term between the two.

None of the variables, except variables related to suicide, had missing values. Analyses including variables related to suicide were performed using complete cases (i.e., after excluding participants with missing data). All analyses were performed using STATA SE version 17.

The analyses assume that within each state, the impact of early marriage on mental health is the same. To explore whether the associations between marriage and mental health outcomes were different in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, we repeated all analyses separately for each state.

We followed the STROBE statement for reporting this paper. 19 