Material and Methods

Integration of multiple protein subcellular localization sources. In this section, we reconstruct the training set for human protein subcellular localization study. The new data set has a richer source and we further reduce the redundancy with CD-HIT 39 . Meanwhile, we expand the size of data sets, which render the training set data more comprehensive and provide a more convincing database for the multi-label classification learning step. The training set reconstruction will be introduced from two aspects, namely, data sources and data processing. The new dataset contains mainly two sources, which are LOCATE 7 and Hum-mPLoc 2.0 40 .

About 526 (480+ 43+ 3 = 526) protein sequences are recorded as multi-label sequences (no repeat), which have two or more types of subcellular sites (the number of sites P 1 is greater than or equals to 1) D M1 . The protein sequence distribution on each subcellular site is shown in Table 1.

The subcellular sites contained in the proteins in Hum-mPLoc 2.0 are scarce, but parts of the protein data contain three or four subcellular sites. Proteins are rich and varied. Therefore, certain superiority is shown in terms of protein function.

From the LOCATE database, we directly obtained the document human.xml of the original XML format about subcellular localization of human. The document accommodates abundant information about human proteins. Our goal is to obtain 64,637 human protein amino acid FASTA sequences and the subcellular sites (site number P 2 is more than or equals to 1) of these sequences. After a rigorous data processing, we obtain the reference data set containing 6776 different protein sequences (no repeat) D 2 . The 6776 protein sequences are distributed in 37 subcellular structures and possess two subcellular locations at most. Among these sequences, 4066 have only one type of subcellular location, which belongs to the single marker sequence data set D S2 . Approximately 2710 protein sequences have two subcellular locations (site number P 2 equals to 1), which belong to the multiple marker sequence data set D M2 . A total of 9486 (4066+ 2710* 2 = 9486) protein sequences (proteins locative, a repetitive protein sequence) correspond to 37 subcellular locations. The protein sequence distribution on each subcellular site is shown in Table 2.

Results of data processing indicate an extremely rich types of proteins and subcellular sites in the LOCATE database. However, the number of protein sequences, which have multiple subcellular sites, is relatively small, especially those belonging to three or more types of subcellular sites. This finding indicates that the protein data in the LOCATE have problems in functional diversity. To compensate for the limitations in the LOCATE database and Shen's basic data set, we combine two types of data and reconstruct basic data sets. By combining Tables 1 and 2, we conclude that the 14 types of subcellular sites in Hum-mPLoc 2.0 are contained entirely in 37 types of subcellular sites in the LOCATE database, which is conducive to our data set reconstruction.

In order to prove the necessary of multi-label classification in the protein subcellular localization, it is required to compare the performances of multi-label and single-label classifiers. However, multi-label dataset cannot be Single marker protein sequence data set D S1 2580 used for single-label classifiers. Therefore, the data sets of multi-label protein sequences and single-label protein sequences were reconstructed separately, but they both come from the sources mentioned in the above section. The reconstructed data set was D RM , and the single labeled data set was D RS . Therefore,
= + - D CD HIT[D D ](1)RM M1 M2 = + - D CD HIT[D D ](2)
RS S1 S2
= + D D D(3)
R R M R S CD-HIT 39 is a software for reducing the similarity of the protein sequences. It can delete the similar sequences from the data set. Here we made the similarity of each pair sequences is less than 40%. Table 3 shows the protein sequences of the reconstructed data set D R and the subcellular sites.  Features for subcellular localization. The above section mainly discusses a series of preprocessing with the data set. The reconstructed data set provides a reliable database for the study on the positioning method. This section focuses on specific features of protein subcellular localization based on machine learning. In this section, three types of feature extraction methods are introduced based on the position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) 41 , pseudo-amino acid composition 42 . In the long process of evolution, some characteristic genes are not eliminated but are selectively retained. These characteristics can effectively characterize the corresponding protein. Feature extraction methods based on PSSM are conducted to compare the protein sequence and rationally analyze with the invariance. PSSM matrix represents the comparison results between the input protein sequence and its homologous protein sequence in Swiss-Prot database. The multiple sequence alignment tools are HAlign 43 and PSI-BLAST 44 (position-specific initiated BLAST). Each input protein sequence generates a PSSM matrix after multiple sequence alignment. The elements in PSSM matrix characterize homology level between amino acids in some positions in the input protein sequence and the amino acid in the corresponding position in its homologous sequence. A smaller element value indicates higher conservation; lower conservation means The reconstructed single labeled set D RS 3448

The reconstructed protein subcellular localization data set D R 4802 Table 3. Subcellular sites and protein sequences distribution in D R.

that the amino acid in the position is prone to mutation. We extracted 20D and 420D features from the PSSM according to different parameters, which are described in detail in the supplementary materials. The purpose of PseAAC is also to improve the accuracy of protein subcellular localization and the prediction of membrane protein. We extracted 188D features from PseACC, including 20D features of amino acid compositions, 24D features based on the contents of amino acids with certain physicochemical properties, 24D features of bivalent frequency and 120D features from eight physicochemical properties. It is described in detail in the supplementary materials, too.

Multi-label classification ensemble learning method. We employed the ensemble multi-label classification method for improving the prediction performance. There have been no ensemble methods for multi-label classification in bioinformatics so far. Next we described the ensemble voting strategies of our method.

Basic classifiers are denoted as = = ... MeanEnsemble algorithm. The prediction result is the probability that the sample is predicted to be λ j by c i . We calculate the average value of each column. Each training sample generates a set of q-dimensional vector:
= ≤ ≤ V v j q { : 1 } ME j
v j is the probability that the sample belongs to the corresponding class label. If 0.5 ≤ v j ≤ 1, the sequence belongs to λ j . If 0 ≤ v j ≤ 0.5, the sequence does not belong to λ j .

MajorityVoteEnsemble algorithm. Every basic classifier separately predicted a sample. The prediction result is S, S ∈ (− 1, + 1). If S = − 1, the sample is recognized as the counterexample by the base classifier; otherwise, it is identified as a positive example. We calculate the average value of each column, and each training sample generates a set of q-dimensional vector:
= ≤ ≤ V v j q { : 1 } MV j
If v j ≥ 0, the sample belongs to λ j ; otherwise, it does not.

TopKEnsemble algorithm. In each column in the result matrix, P accuracy values are sorted in descending order and the average of the first K (K is determined by p) accuracy values is calculated to obtain a set of q-dimensional vector:
= ≤ ≤ V v j q { : 1 } TK j
If 0.5 ≤ v j < 1, the sequence belongs to λ j . If 0 ≤ v j < 0.5, the sequence does not belong to λ j . The work flow of our protein subcellular localization prediction method can be shown in Fig. 1. In the data part, two sources of protein subcellular localization information were integrated. Then we tried three kinds of common features for representing the protein sequences. Multi-label classifier was employed for the prediction. The implementation was done with Mulan 45 , which is an open source machine learning software tool. Evaluation criteria and measurement. Average precision (AP) 46 : AP refers to the average accuracy of multi-label classification. This index is positively related to multi-label classification system performance. If AP = 1, the classification effect is the best. The calculation formula of AP is as follows:
∑ ∑ λ = λ = ∈ AP f N y L rank x ( ) 1 1 ( , )(4)i N i y i f i 1 i λ λ λ λ = | ≤ ∈ ′ ′ ′ L r ank X rank X y { ( , ) ( , ), } (5) f i f i i
Here N is the number of all samples; |y i | is the number of the samples with label y i ; rank(x i, λ) means the prediction value (sometimes viewed as probability) of sample x i with label λ. We use AP as a primary measure of our comparative experiment.