Materials and methods


Tobacco samples

Thirty-four brands of SLT widely used in different regions of Bangladesh were chosen for this study, including several popular brands of zarda, gul and sada pata [32]. All SLT products were purchased and collected from retail stores in the Bangladeshi cities of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Khulna in November and December of 2016. Included among these SLT products were 22 popular brands corresponding to 'zarda'. Four brands of powdered snuff commonly known as 'gul' and six brands of non-tobacco additives (three Pan masala brands and 3 types of betel nut) were also collected. Six common U.S. brands of snuff were purchased from local tobacco shops in Spokane, WA in December 2016, while six Indian and two Pakistani brands were purchased from Mumbai, India and Karachi, Pakistan in March and April, 2017. All products were shipped to the laboratory at Washington State University (Spokane, WA) within 25 days after their purchase and were immediately stored at 4˚C until the time of analysis.

Two 


Reagents

Nicotine, NNK, NNN, NAT and NAB standards and their corresponding d4-labeled internal standards were purchased from Toronto Research Chemicals (Toronto, Canada). UPLC-MS grade solvents including methanol and ammonium acetate were purchased from Fisher Scientific. Ultra-pure water (MilliQ Q-POD) was used for all analysis.


Analytical methods

Immediately upon the opening of an SLT product, samples were ground to a fine powder using a mortar and pestle and stored at 4ºC for subsequent nicotine and TSNA content analysis. The extraction and quantification of nicotine and TSNAs was performed by a modification of the method previously used and recommended by CORESTA. For the extraction of TSNAs and nicotine from SLT products, approximately 100 mg (for TSNA analysis) or 20 mg (for nicotine analysis) of ground SLT powder were transferred into a 50 mL conical flask containing internal standard (for TSNA quantification: 10 ppm each of NNN-d4, NNK-d4, NAT-d4 and NAB-d4; for nicotine quantification: 100 ppm of nicotine-d4) and 15-20 mL 100 mM ammonium acetate. After 40 min of shaking at 180 rpm in an orbital shaker at room temperature, each sample was filtered using a 0.2 μm syringe filter. Analysis was performed using an Acquity H class ultra-pressure liquid chromatograph (UPLC; Waters) equipped with a BEH C18 (2.1 X 50 mm, 1.7 μm) UPLC column at 45˚C. Analytes were separated using a gradient elution at 0.4 mL/min under the following conditions: 0.5 min with 90% buffer A (5 mM ammonium acetate) and 10% buffer B (100% MeOH), followed by a linear gradient for 3.0 min to 70% buffer B and a subsequent linear gradient for 1.0 min to 90% buffer B. Flow continued for 1 min in 95% buffer B before re-equilibrium in 10% buffer B for 2 min. Analytes were detected using a Waters Xevo TQD tandem mass spectrometer equipped with a Zspray electrospray ionization interface operated in the positive ion mode, with the capillary voltage at 0.6 kV. Nitrogen was used as both the cone and desolvation gas at 50 and 800 L/h, respectively. Ultrapure argon was used for collision-induced dissociation. The desolvation temperature was 500˚C. For the detection of TSNAs and nicotine, the mass spectrometer was operated in multiple reaction-monitoring mode (MRM). The ion-related parameters monitored for each transitions are provided in Fig 1. The minimum levels of detection (LOD) for nicotine and each of the TSNAs was 1 and 5 ng/g SLT powder, respectively.

Previous studies have suggested that increased levels of TSNAs may be directly related to tobacco moisture content, as moisture may promote microbial growth which contributes to increased nitrosation, an important step in the formation of TSNAs during processing and storage [37]. Studies have also suggested that tobacco acidity levels may be a determinant of the fraction of unprotonated nicotine in SLT products since the uncharged form is most readily absorbed during oral tobacco use [38,39]. The moisture content and pH were immediately determined after preparing each SLT powder. The analytical methods used for determination of moisture content (oven volatile) and pH in SLTs followed previously reported method. Briefly, 2 g of ground SLT samples were mixed with 20 ml of water, and after 15 min of shaking, the pH of the slurry was measured. For moisture content, 2 g SLT powder was weighed, dried at 100˚C for 3 h, and weighed again; the difference in weight was attributed to water content within each SLT product.


Data analysis

Data were analyzed using the Masslynx 3.5 software provided by Waters. All chromatogram peaks were reviewed, and integration manually corrected when necessary. Calibration curves were analyzed using linear regression with 1/x weighting. All standard and sample concentrations were determined using internal standard peak area versus analyte peak area. The Welch's t-test was used to compare, (i) TSNA, and (ii) nicotine levels in SLT products from different countries. Unprotonated nicotine was calculated as a percentage of total nicotine using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation [40]. The F-test was used to compare variance within different brand types, and Pearson coefficient analysis was used to assess potential correlations between, (i) TSNA and nicotine levels, and (ii) TSNA or nicotine content and pH, within the Bangladeshi brands. All statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad prism 6 software.