Methods

Adopting a mixed-methods approach, this study focused on examining the influence of blended PD on teachers. The data presented for this study was collected as part of a broader, multiyear project aimed at enhancing K-12 STEM teachers' understanding of content and pedagogical knowledge necessary to teaching CT in STEM areas. Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval was obtained before the data were collected and analyzed. All the teachers were teaching in highneed schools with Free and Reduced-Price Meal Program rates much higher than the state average.


The Context

A description of the PD is needed first to contextualize the study. The professional development program employed a blended learning approach, mixing online and face-to-face meetings.

1. The PD started with a three-hour face-to-face meeting where participants were introduced to the project leaders, mentors/coaches, technical supporters, and each other. The online course platform was also briefly introduced. Participants took various pre-surveys during this session. 2. For the next five months, participants worked on the online modules. A total of four online modules, comprising approximately 45 hours of work, were completed. These online modules focused on important CT concepts like modeling and included videos, text information, games, and hands-on activities to help familiarize teachers with the content. Various quizzes were also incorporated in the modules, providing teachers immediate feedback about their learning. The online component also offered opportunities for teachers to interact with each other and specialists in various areas, including experts in CT, math and science educators, and technical supporters. During the online component, two optional face-to-face tutorial sessions were conducted to help teachers who might have technical difficulties. 3. A five-day summer institute (25 hours of face to face meetings) was conducted, aiming to help teachers understand how to integrate CT into their classroom practice. Teachers created lesson plans integrating CT. Post-surveys were also completed during this time. 4. The next six months were dedicated to a fifth online module. The teachers were also asked to further develop their CT integrated lessons and start implementing the lessons. 5. At the end of the sixth month, two colloquiums were held, allowing teachers to showcase their implementation work. Focus group interviews of the teachers were also conducted.

The blended PD approach was intentionally designed to provide teachers adequate time to engage with the content as their levels of CT and CS proficiencies varied. It is important to note, however, that the coaches maintained regular contact with the participating teachers as they completed the online portions and a few face-to-face support sessions were also offered for any teachers who needed additional support.

The online course, using EdX (a MOOC environment), started with an introduction session followed by five modules, with the first four modules focused on modeling using Starlogo Nova and last model took a game-based approach using Scratch. Both Starlogo Nova and Scratch are agent-based game and simulation programming environments. Below is a description of these modules:

1. The course introduction had a welcome page, brief overview of each module and material covered, expectations, the operational definition of CT by ISTE, and material to get teachers started (e.g., how to navigate the course, how to use the software StarLogo Nova). 2. The first module was an introduction of computer modeling focusing on science. Teachers first watched a video of real people enacting a simulation, and then compared that to a computer module of the same simulation. Then several more real-world phenomena were provided, allowing teachers to see how computer models simulate these phenomena. At the end, teachers learned about connections between science education standards and CS education standards. Scaffolded programming exercises were integrated throughout the whole module. 3. The second module was similar in structure but focused on connecting computer modeling related to math learning. 4. The third module tried to reinforce CS concepts such as procedures, loops, and variables, as well as introduce new concepts like categories of agents. Again, teachers learned how to model various real-world events, ranging from dice rolling to epidemics. For instance, in lesson one, teachers worked on a simple predator-prey model to learn ecosystem dynamics. by using and modifying a computer model of a simple virtual ecosystem. 5. The fourth module asked teachers to start building their own models to illustrate the usefulness of models in different STEM fields. Teachers not only practice CT concepts like operators and sequences, but also exercise CT skills such as testing, debugging, and abstracting using procedures. The first four modules were built on the Project GUTS' PD program funded by National Science Foundation. 6. The fifth module took a different approach, adopting game-based learning instead of focusing on simulation. In this module, teachers consolidated their CT skills through the design and development of their own educational games.

Scaffolding was carefully designed into all the models that moved teachers progressively toward deeper understanding and stronger skill acquisition. For example, the first lesson had no programming requirements but instead asked teachers to examine the existing codes to introduce basic programming concepts and terminologies (e.g., conditionals, Boolean expressions).

When selecting teachers to participate, we intentionally chose two or three teachers from the same school whenever possible, hoping to promote collaborative learning. This project was partially supported by a state grant and the participating teachers were paid for their PD participation.


Participants

Initially, a total of 28 K-12 teachers participated and completed the first round of surveys. However, three teachers discontinued the program after the first session. The remaining 25 teachers constituted the sample of this study.

Amongst the teachers, ten were teaching in elementary, six in middle, eight in high schools, and one was a coach working with K-12 teachers. Five participants taught only math while eight taught sciences exclusively. The remaining 12 teachers taught both math and science. All but two teachers had no prior training in programming.


Data

This study was part of a large research project aiming to help teachers gain content and pedagogical knowledge of CT. The initial data collection included surveys, quizzes, pre-tests and post-tests of CT knowledge and pedagogy, teacher written assignments, researchers' reflective journals, and teachers' feedback through interviews. Teachers' written assignments included modified lesson/unit plans, reflections, and online interactions posted throughout the course and were analyzed using thematic analysis by the researchers. This paper focuses on the impact as well as the efficacy of the described PD model in improving teachers' content knowledge of CT primarily through analysis of the results of the pre-and post-tests related to CT, written assignments, and researchers' reflective journals. The assessment tool developed by the National Science Foundation funded Project GUTS program was used for the pre-and post-tests. The tests consisted of multiple-choice questions assessing teacher's knowledge related to CT. The questions ranged from definitions of CT and modeling, to basic concepts of programming and commands, to connections of modeling to sciences. The appendix provides sample questions.


Analysis

To answer the first research question, descriptive analyses of the 28 participating teachers' preand post-tests of content knowledge were conducted first. Due to various reasons, only 17 teachers completed both pre-and post-tests. Their test results were analyzed using a paired t-test.

To answer research questions 2 and 3, thematic analysis of the qualitative data, including the teacher written outcomes and researcher reflective journals, was conducted in an ongoing, iterative fashion. Team members discussed data and informally shared thoughts during project meetings. The formal analysis started after raw data was prepared. First, all data were read through by two researchers, with initial themes identified. A matrix was created summarizing the main topics. Then the preliminary themes were revised by clustering similar themes, and organized as recurring, unique, and leftover themes. Next, the entire data set was recoded, adding new emerging themes, and identified more descriptive wording for the categories. A second matrix was created with all themes included and possible interconnections amongst the themes. Related themes were further grouped together which resulted in the final categories (Creswell, 2014).