Patients and methods

Patients and groups. A series of patients exhibiting melanoma involving the foot and ankle, from the First Hospital of Jilin University (Changchun, China) during the twelve-year period from January 1999 to December 2010, were retrospectively reviewed. A total of 21 patients (males, n=14; females, n=7) were enrolled in the present study and the mean age was 54.2 years (range, 39-70 years). The inclusion criteria were as follows: i) The patient diagnoses were validated by postoperative biopsy; and ii) the patient's skin lesion was confined to the foot and ankle. Among the patients, 10 underwent amputation (group A) and the remaining 11 underwent salvage surgery with soft tissue reconstruction (group S). One patient was lost during the follow-up after 25 months; all of the remaining patients were followed up for an additional 6-92 months (median, 58 months) postoperatively. Patients provided written informed consent and the study was approved by the ethics committee of the First Hospital of Jilin University (Jilin, China).

Cutaneous flap design. Cutaneous flaps were designed based on the incision size and anatomical characteristics of the affected area. Three types of cutaneous flap, including the medial plantar, reverse sural artery neurocutaneous island and the lateral supramalleolar flap, were selected to repair the soft tissue defects of the foot and ankle resulting from tumor resection. Specifically, a medial plantar flap was used for the repair of the sole and forefoot; a reverse sural neurocutaneous island flap was used for the repair of the dorsum, sole and heel of the foot; and a lateral malleolus flap was used for the repair of the lateral malleolus, dorsum and heel of the foot.

The cutaneous flap design was guided by the following rules: ii) The size and shape of the cutaneous flap must be in accordance with the defect at the recipient site (not too large or small). A cutaneous flap that is too large may cause a bloated appearance of the skin, whereas a cutaneous flap that is too small may influence the blood supply as a result of increased local tension. ii) In order to secure a sufficient blood supply, the pedicle of the cutaneous flap should be sufficiently wide and long. iii) Considering that the foot comprises thin skin, subcutaneous tissue and substantial joint activity, the cutaneous flap for foot and ankle reconstruction is required to be as thin as possible. If the cutaneous flap is too thick or bloated, it would inevitably affect the activities of the ankle joint and aesthetics of the foot. iv) The cutaneous flap for plantar reconstruction must be wear-resistant and allow a protective sensation.

Surgical technique. Melanoma tumors were excised based on their site of origin and anatomical characteristics. In group S, lesions were widely excised using a margin of 3-5 cm in all cases and all excisions extended into or included the deep fascia. Following resection, frozen tumor sections underwent pathological testing, in order to identify clean margins, and the exact size of the soft tissue defect. Patients in group A underwent amputation, including leg amputation, tarsometatarsal amputation and toe amputation.

Postoperative care and follow-up. Following surgery, all patients were admitted to a specialized microsurgery intensive care unit for monitoring. The patients were administered with postoperative chemotherapy and biological therapy, either alone or in combination with dacarbazine, cisplatin and intramuscular injection of interleukin-2. Surgical complications, cutaneous flap survival, tumor recurrence and metastasis, recovery of foot function, sensory recovery, and patients' complaints were observed during the hospital stay and the follow-up period. The therapeutic efficacy was observed in each group and compared.