Patients and methods

Patient groups and randomization. Between April 2014 and July 2015, 38 patients with clinical and X-ray evidence of transverse patella fractures with displacements >3 mm were recruited at the Department of Orthopaedics, Changhai Hospital Affiliated to the Second Military Medical University (Shanghai, China). Age and sex distributions are presented in Table I. Among them, 21 patients were randomly assigned (by a coin flip) to the MIS group while 17 patients were assigned to the OS group by a scientist who was blinded to the present study. Exclusion criteria included an open fracture, a lower limb fracture on the same side, chronic degenerative joint disease, previous knee surgical intervention, peripheral neural damage and osteoporosis defined as bone mineral density value 2.5 standard deviations or more below peak bone mass (T-score ≤-2.5) measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (12). The current study was approved by the ethics review committee of the Second Military Medical University and written informed consent was obtained from all patients.

The Cable Pin System. The Zimmer ® Cable-Ready ® Cable Pin System (Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc., Warsaw, IN, USA) is a new type of internal fixation system, which consists of a cable and a pin (Fig. 1). One end of the system is the pin, a partially threaded 4.0 mm cancellous screw, which can provide compression between fragments and prevent the cancellous screw from backing out. The other end of the system is a guide needle, which can easily be passed through bone tunnels. The material connecting the two ends is a cable with a special braiding structure. It is braided from 19 wires with each wire containing 7 monofilament wires with a diameter of 0.005 mm. Therefore, a cable comprises 133 monofilament wires. This design provides the cable with great strength and excellent pliability.

Surgical technique. All surgeries were performed by the same surgeon (QZ). Spinal anesthesia or combined spinal-epidural anesthesia was adopted for the surgery. The patient was positioned in the supine position, with a sterile soft cushion used to support the injured knee, leaving the joint in a 20˚ flexed position, allowing the knee to perform flexion-extension movements.

i) MIS surgical technique. If the minor transverse fracture fragment was at the proximal end and the major fragment was at the distal end of the patella (Fig. 2), the site of the proximal fragment would be confirmed and a ~3 cm longitudinal midline incision would be made from the proximal end of the patella down to the lower side of the proximal fragment (Fig. 3). The incision was from the skin to the prepatellar fascia. The soft tissues were pulled downwardto expose the fracture line. Any hematomas and traumatic bone debris were removed, and the articular cavity was washed with normal saline solution. Manipulative reduction was made with the assistance of two towel clamps applied percutaneously. During the reduction procedure, the knee joint was flexed and extended several times, and the fragments were squeezed and pressed against to the femoral condyle to facilitate the reduction of the articular surface. A K-wire was then drilled superiorly and percutaneously into the patella from the lower side of the apex for temporary fixation following the reduction (Fig. 4A). A C-arm fluoroscopy was used to confirm the anatomical reduction of the articular surface (Fig. 4B), and then the prepatellar fascia was sutured.

The proximal 3 cm incision was then pulled upward and the inserting points for the two pins were selected at the medial and lateral one-third of the superior pole of the patella. Using a drill guide to protect the quadriceps tendon, the pins of the Cable Pin System were inserted into the patella in an inferior direction parallel to the articular surface. The threaded portions of the pins were drilled across the fracture site, and the two pins were directed in the patella parallel to each other and perpendicular to the fracture line, which would provide compression between the fragments (Fig. 5). Each pin was drilled until it was slightly countersunk into the bone cortex to prevent protrusion of the pin into the soft tissues. A 5 mm incision was made at the medial and lateral side of the distal one-fourth to one-fifth of the patella, respectively. Following this, two subcutaneous tunnels, starting from the proximal 3 cm incision and ending at each of the distal 5 mm incision, were created using a pair of curved forceps to divide the tissues under the deep fascia covering the distal fracture fragment of the patella. A horizontally directed bone tunnel was created anterior to the pins, in the distal fragment, using a drill bit through the medial and lateral 5 mm incisions (Fig. 6).

The leader of one cable was passed through the prepatellar subcutaneous tunnel from the proximal 3 cm incision (assumed as incision X) to the diagonal distal 5 mm incision (assumed as incision Y; Fig. 7A). The cable was then inserted into the horizontally directed bone tunnel from incision Y and out of the tunnel at the other distal 5 mm incision (assumed as incision Z) (Fig. 7B). Finally, the same cable was passed through the other prepatellar subcutaneous tunnel from incision Z to X (Fig. 7C). The Cable Pin Crimper (Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc.) was used to pull the two cables crossed at incision X to remove slack and fasten them in a crimp, forming a 'figure eight' (Fig. 7D). A cable cutter was used to cut the excess cables flush at the crimp (Fig. 8). Thus, with the exception of the interfragmentary screw fixation by the two paralleled pins, the cable was in an incomplete 'figure eight', which reflected the tension band principle (Fig. 9). If the fracture line was in the distal half of the patella, the midline longitudinal incision would be made at the distal end of the patella, accordingly, and the two pins would be reversed and directed superiorly from the lower side. ii) Open surgery. The conventional midline longitudinal incision over the patella, which was ~12 cm in length, was made and the fractures exposed as described previously (13). Following the preliminary reduction of the fracture, two pins of the Cable Pin System were inserted in parallel into the patella through the midline longitudinal incision to achieve interfragmentary compression. The two cables were crossed in a 'figure eight' over the anterior surface of the patella, with the leader of one cable passed through the horizontally directed bone tunnel, and were pulled to remove slack and fastened in a crimp. The excess cable flush was cut at the crimp.

Postoperative treatments. For all the 38 patients, an elastic bandage was used for 2 days after surgery to reduce swelling of the knee and the likelihood of a hematoma. No immobilization was recommended. Passive exercise was initiated 1 day after the surgery by a continuous passive motion machine (Kinetec Optima ® ; Kinetec S.A.), for three, 1-h sessions, starting from 0 to 60˚, increasing 15˚ per day until 90˚ was achieved. This training lasted for 3-5 days. Active flexion exercises of the knee joint in prone position were encouraged.

The patients began to get out of bed 3 days after surgery and were encouraged to start bearing weight on the leg that was operated on during level walking. Active extension exercises of the knee joint were allowed 3 weeks after surgery, and full weightbearing was allowed after the fracture was healed following a radiographic assessment.

Postoperative follow-up and assessment. Clinical and radiographical follow-up were performed at 4 and 8 weeks, and at 12 months postoperatively. All the x-ray films were read independently by two well-trained orthopedic surgeons (QZ and HN). At 4 and 8 weeks, pain was measured using the visual analog scale (VAS) (14) with scores between 0 (no pain) and 10 (the most intense pain), and active flexion and extension of the knee joint were measured in degrees by a goniometry. The function of the knee was evaluated by the clinical grading scale, defined by Bostman et al (15), at week 8 and month 12.

The total score was stratified as follows: <20, unsatisfactory; 20-27, good; 28-30, excellent.

Statistical analysis. All values are mean ± standard deviation or number of patients. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare quantitative variables and the chi-square test with continuity correction or the Fisher exact test was used to compare the frequency distributions of categorical variables between the two groups. All statistical analyses    were performed using SPSS 15.0 statistical software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). P<0.05 indicated that the difference between groups was statistically significant.